As to beauty or magnificence of scenery, Loch Lomond has many interesting features common to it with the other Scottish lakes which occupy the chasms of the great primitive mountainous district; it is, however, more closely connected with a different set of hollows. It is the most characteristic example of a group of long recesses which lie together, and nearly parallel to each other, but which, instead of following the direction of the mountain ranges, stretch almost perpendicular to it, generally cutting through the Transition and part of the Primitive rocks, together with the older members of the Floetz formation. All the others of those valleys are connected with the sea by means of the Frith of Clyde, and are partly filled with its salt water, and enlivened by its appropriate animals. There is reason enough to believe, that this was at one time the condition of Loch Lomond also; but at present, we find there, along with the Ocean's depth, only the remains of its inhabitants.

  One of these marine deposites was about right or ten feet above the highest level of the present waters. It lay in a small hollow, under a projecting precipice of limestone, dose to the margin of the lake. The only remains of it now are some fragments of a very compact calc-tuff, containing sea-shells disseminated through it The limestone-rock is now quarried; and the calc-tuff being the most accessible and richest limestone, was first carried off for use. The Shells appear to have been accumulated in a situation exposed to the stalactite droppings from the lime-rock; In the interior of the tuffa, they are chiefly the Mytilus edülis, or its congeners; but the surface is sprinkled with imbedded specimens, belonging to the genera Planorbis and Helix, which have accidentally fallen upon it This quarry is on the east ride of the lake, about two miles north-west front the mouth of the Endrick, and on the north ride of the great range of islands composed of Secondary Conglomerate, which stretches across the southern end of the lake. This limestone is on the lands of his Grace the Duke of Montrose, and is worked for his tenantry, but is not much esteemed for agricultural purposes. It is highly crystalline in its fracture, appearing to be irregular layers of crystals separated by qüartz and clay.
  There are other two places, which afford shells, in vèry different circumstances. Those points are similar in situation ; both are in slight bays opening to the north, and presenting a steep gravelly beach to the water. One of them is on the island Inch Lonach, opposite to the village of Luss; and the other, on the lands of H. MACDONALD BUCHANAN, Esq., near the south-east angle of the lake; The shells’ begin to appear about half-way between the highest and lowest, or the winter and summer, surfaces of the water, which varies in this respect about six feet. After removing a slight covering of coarse gravel, we find a thin bed of clay, of different shades of brown, passing into yellow colours, as we descend. In the upper, or brown day, are found shells of the following species. Those marked ? are doubtful.

  A skilful conchologist would discover many others, from the numerous traces of them in the clay. Those shells appear to have been deposited generally in an entire state, and many are found with both valves in their natural position. The Balanus is still slightly attached to the Venus of Pecten; and the spines of the Echinus are found dustered in the clay inclosing its fragments; so that they must have been either covered by water to a considerable depth, or thrown on a beach not much exposed to waves. Few of them, however, can be extracted entire, as several of the species are always in a state of gritty chalk; but many complete and beautiful specimens of the pecten can easily be procured. Few of their fragments appear on the exposed part of the beach, but, during summer, many may be seen a few feet under water. Those deposites cannot be more than about twenty-two feet above the present level of the sea. It is probable that an attentive inspection of the margin of the lake would discover many others similar to them.

  A little attention may be necessary, to an opinion, which we sometimes hear expressed in conversation, “that such hollows, as Loch Lomond, with a bottom so far below the level of the ocean, ought, if ever they were filled by it, still to retain its salt water.” It seems to be imagined, that the sea-water, on account of its greater specific gravity, is still retained in the deep pits of these chasms, and that the fresh-water glides unmixed above it, or changes by evaporation and renewal, without affecting its deeply buried mass. It does not seem difficult to demonstrate the improbability of this supposition. For the phenomena of solution can be accounted for only on some hypothesis such as this: that, when a film of pure water is applied to a film containing salt in solution, there is a tendency in them to unite, and form a compound of less saturation than the latter; which compound has a corresponding influence on the nearest, or on any number of saturated films beneath it; and will, in like manner, be affected and changed by the next pure film above it, and, successively, by any number of films in any depth of water. The changes will cease only when an equilibrium of attractions has taken place through the whole mass, which will then be in a state of medium and uniform saturation. Whatever be the time required for the combination of two films, that time would be an element in the equation, representing the whole period necessary to produce uniformity, which must therefore depend on the number of films, or be a function of the depth. Changes of temperature at the surface would very much accelerate the result, by sending downwards dense films, having the highest degree of attraction, until stopt among others, having the same specific gravity, arising from greater saturation; so that probably no long time would elapse before nearly uniform saturation took place, even though the combined depth of the fluids were considerable. But the tendency towards uniform saturation is opposed in a manner which must quickly draw off the salt-water from a hollow, such AS a lake; because the surface-water, in general, is continually changing, and the water, which has become slightly saturated, flows off, and is replaced by that which is purer, and has a greater attraction for the salt; and to satisfy this augmented attraction, the progress of change downwards must be much more rapid. Consequently, however slowly the tendency to equilibrium may act in an isolated solution,—in the other case, as the progress of exhaustion goes on more rapidly, we may expect that no long period would be required to destroy all perceptible saltness. That this period has long since passed, in our Scottish lakes, can scarcely be doubted; but though we be not able to bring up sea-water from the bottom of any of them, yet all are interesting objects of observation. Loch Lomond in particular, as the additions it receives are so uniformly distributed over the whole space of its margin, is admirably fitted for experiments on the changes or stability of temperature in deep waters.


