SIR, 

I have just read in the 29th number of your Journal an invidious crimination of the part which I have taken in the cheap edition of So. Min. Conchology, now in course of publication by M. Nicolet. No- 
thing would be more richly merited than the strictures which are there passed upon me, were it not that the assertions and insinuations which the article contains are altogether malicious and without foundation. As you have brought forward this accusation in your journal, I expect from your sense of honour that you will give publicity to my justification in your forthcoming number. 

Notwithstanding the great importance of Mr. Sowerby's work on the Fossils of England, this publication has met with but few purchasers on the continent ; and the knowledge which I possess of the most important European Scientific Institutions, has assured me that a French or German 
edition of the work, published at a lower price, would be rendering a real service to Science, without in any way proving injurious to the original edition, for which the principal demand is in England. Would it then not be unfair to represent such a publication as a systematic piracy ; as though translations of scientific works were not being made every day with the consent of authors, and with still greater reason after their death ; and as if in doing that, which you, as the conductor of a scientific journal, ought to know I am justified in, I am likely to injure the family of Mr. Sowerby in depriving them of the benefit of a publication of which they have had the disposal for more than fifteen years, and which has been completed ten years, after the addition of two posthumous volumes ? But in addition to this, when I agreed with a lithographer, M. Nicolet, to bring out a cheap Sowerby, I gratuitously furnished him with a translation of the text, enriched with numerous additions and corrections. It is then altogether untrue to say that the edition in question is but a sorry imitation of the plates of the English work accompanied by a mere translation of the text. I should never have lent my name to such a machination. It appears to me therefore, very strange conduct in the Editor of a scientific journal to give, without examination, publicity to such calumnies ; and I affirm that the insinuation of my having entered upon this undertaking with a view to pecuniary emolument, to be altogether unfounded. On the contrary, only 300 copies have been struck off, and I agreed with the Editor as the price of my participation in it, that the work should not be sold at a sum above that necessary to cover the expense of its publication. I protest also, that I had not the least.intention of injuring the Editor of the original edition : if I have dispatched some copies to England it has been with the view of letting my scientific friends see the number of additions and 
corrections which I have incorporated in my translation. All this proves that in the present instance, as always, I have only acted from a regard to the interests of science. An illustrious English geologist can, if required, relate what I said to him on this subject before I occupied myself with 
the translation. 

This leads me to make one other remark to you. I understand, that by way of reprisal, as though I had committed hostilities, there is in preparation a subscription to bring out a reprint of my Fossil Fishes, with an English translation of the text, at 10s. a livraison instead of 30s. Permit me to tell you my notions upon this subject. If the fact be true, and I am to regard this act in the light of a reprisal, I must deem it most perfidious and disreputable ; but if the thing be only undertaken as a matter of utility, I declare with the same frankness, that I shall be gratified, hoping thus to see my work pass into the hands of some hundreds of persons who would not perhaps be able to obtain it at the original subscription price. 
As I have now pretty well ascertained the amount of my subscribers, I have only had a few copies struck off beyond that number, and my edition will consequently be disposed of before a reprint can be completed ; and as I have effaced the drawings from the stones, at no future time shall T be de- 
sirous of attempting another edition of a work which has all along been to me a source of vexation and sacrifice, whatever intellectual enjoyment it may have produced me. If, therefore, a cheap edition of my work be really seriously talked of, I should like to know the parties who are about 
to engage in it, as I should have some advice to give them to enable them more readily to attain the object which I, at least, think they should have in view ; viz., the diffusion of a work regarded as useful, and not merely an attempt to injure me. As my work will be completely finished in a 
year, with the 15th livraison, which I hope to publish next Easter, I shall esteem myself fortunate to see the work translated, in whatever shape it may appear. 

Hoping that you will insert the contents of this letter entire and literally translated, I have the honour to inform you that I have sent copies to several of my friends. 


