   SECTION NO. 1. —From the back of Table Mountain to the Middle
Roggeveld.
   In this section granite is the fundamental rock, though the superincumbent gneiss and clayslate, as will afterwards be shown, are the oldest. It forms the basis of the celebrated Table Mountain and Lion’s Head at Cape Town, and in those localities is, generally speaking, coarse-grained, and frequently porphyritic.
   At the Paarl and in the neighbourhood of Bain’s Kloof it often assumes a binary form, the mica being there wanting, and is everywhere traversed by veins of quartz and felspar; whereas at George, where this rock also appears, the mica seems to predominate and is in very large flakes. 4 The granite is also found there in a porphyritic form.
   At the foot of Table Mountain and at Bain’s Kloof are extensive beds of a decomposed granite, sometimes attaining a thickness of from 50 to 60 feet; the angles of its component minerals are frequently rounded, and masses of sandstone from the mountains above are sometimes found imbedded in it; and, though it is so soft in some places as to be cut with a pickaxe or spade, yet distinct veins of quartz running through it can be traced in all directions: when it passes into the real granite, the line of junction can never be traced.
   Granite, I am told, is also to be found in the neighbourhood of Port Natal; but I did not observe any when I was in that country. It is also said to appear in considerable masses at the Kamies Berg and the Bushman Karoo Flats; but I have not laid it down on the Map in those parts, as I do not know its extent.
   I am not aware that any of the precious or other metals have ever been discovered in this rock in South Africa ; but at the Lion’s Head I found crystals of tourmaline and a small bed of kaolin.
   In Europe, granite is generally found in the most elevated countries, as in the Alps, Pyrenees, &c.; but in South Africa, on the contrary, it invariably assumes a perfectly subordinate character, nowhere showing any elevated peaks, lofty aiguilles, or serrated ridges. The Paarl Mountain and the Paardeberg are the most prominent of their class ; but neither of them exceed the height of 1500 feet, and in the neighbourhood of the lofty sedimentary mountains appear but small hillocks in comparison. When I first saw the granitic formations in the district of George, I mistook them for tertiary rocks, from their soft rounded appearance, until a section in one of the rivers undeceived me. We next come to the Gneiss, which never occurs but in contiguity with the granite; for it seems always to pass into clayslate when beyond the influence of the plutonic rock below. Section No. 4, PI. XXL, shows the invasion of the latter on the ancient sedimentary deposits, where its veins are seen to penetrate the laminated rocks, whilst huge detached masses of granite are entangled in the gneiss, and fragments of gneiss remain isolated in the granite.
   Gneiss occurs at Platte Klip at the foot of Table Mountain, Hottentots Holland, and near Little Brak River in the district of George. I consider it to be contemporaneous with the Clayslate, which is very extensively developed both in the southern and western parts of the colony, and is of great thickness. This formation contains rocks of various kinds, and presents a great diversity of aspects. At Cape Town extensive quarries are worked in it for building-purposes, and at Robben Island, in Table Bay, the rock is cut into square flags for pavements, grave-stones, &c., taking a smooth face and cutting very freely. It is there of a bluish-black colour, but is devoid of slaty cleavage, as are, I believe, all the other schists of the colony. In many parts it passes into mica-slate, as at Swartland, Tulbagh, Slaryhoek, Worcester, and many other parts. In some places it is completely decomposed into a soft clay, of various colours,—yellow, blue, pink, white, and brown, as at Bain’s Kloof, where, in a tunnel which I perforated, through a thickness of 400 feet, I never required even the aid of a crowbar in the excavations (except through some massive quartz- veins), the whole being worked by the pickaxe and spade.
   The clayslate, like the granite, never rises to any great height; but is generally found to constitute all the valleys of elevation in the western and southern parts of the colony, extending as far east as Gamtoos River.
   The laminse or strata, when visible, are always at high angles, frequently vertical and contorted, and often entirely overturned, having evidently suffered much from lateral compression. It is quite impossible to calculate the thickness of the clayslate. I have made many extensive excavations in these rocks, but never saw the least sign of a fossil in them. Hence I conclude that they are non-fossiliferous. Numerous quartz-veins traverse them in all directions. Their strike, like that of all the older rocks, is generally from S.E. and N.W. to E.S.E and N.N.W.; and, as far as my researches go, they are destitute both of metals and minerals.
   Lying unconformably on the clayslate is a formation of great thickness and extent, which, from its geological position, though not at all from its physical attributes, I consider to be the equivalent of The Lower Silurian.
   This is also widely developed; it consists of unfossiliferous sandstone and conglomerate, and forms the summits of Table Mountain and Lion’s Head, as well as that of all the extensive and lofty ranges of the western and southern parts of the colony.
   A very good description of it has been given, as far as it refers to the neighbourhood of Cape Town, in Clarke Abel’s Travels, p. 295, to which I may with confidence refer. But I must at the same time observe that the imbedded pebbles very much decrease in numbers in an easterly direction, but increase as the range trends northerly; for at Pikeneers Kloof and Rinoster Hoek the whole mountain seems to he one mass of conglomerate, many of the imbedded stones being larger than a man’s fist.
   Those imbedded stones and pebbles being principally composed of clayslate and quartz, it becomes a matter of interesting speculation as to the district whence they were derived. No antecedent quartzose rock (excepting the quartz-veins in the clayslate) at present exists in South Africa; hence we must conclude that the parent of those numerous pebbles and conglomerates now lies buried in the depths of the Atlantic or Indian Oceans.
   When this sandstone is seen to rest on the granite, as it does at Lion’s Head (see Section 4) and at Du Zoits Kloof, it is evident that the granite had cooled down and was perfectly quiescent at the time of the deposition of the former; showing a very marked difference between the junction of the gneiss with the granite, and of the latter with the sandstone,—both of which are shown in this section.
   The thickness of this formation it is difficult to ascertain ; but, as far as I have been enabled to estimate it, it cannot be less than from 10,000 to 12.000 feet; so that, if Table Mountain was ever covered with a like thickness of deposit, which I have no doubt it was, and had retained it until the present day, then it would eclipse the Peak of Teneriffe, or even rival Mont Blanc in altitude.
   To the advocates for the sudden upheaval of mountains, I think the removal of such a mass from the top of Table Mountain presents a considerable difficulty: but, compared to the immense denudation that has taken place in this formation on the Cape Flats alone, to say nothing of the extensive valleys of elevation leading from Tulbagh by Worcester, Swellendam, and George, and from Bain’s Kloof to Picket Berg and Donkin’s Bay, it is a mere nothing. A glance at Section No. 1, from the top of Table Mountain to that of the high mountain at Michell’s Pass, will give some faint idea of the magnitude of this denudation; for there cannot be the smallest doubt that those two mountains were at one time connected.
   It appears to me that no agent with which we are acquainted could have effected this immense degradation and the complete removal of the fragments but the tides and marine currents, as the mountains slowly emerged from the bosom of the primeval ocean, and that too probably before the rocks had attained their present tenacity of consistence. Not a fragment of this sandstone is now to be found on the flats or plains at any distance from the mountains, except here and there small portions in situ, resting unconformably on the clayslate, just sufficient to attest that the whole had at one time been continuous.
   This formation extends from Donkin’s Bay, on the west coast, to Cape St. Francis, on the east, including all the high mountains of the Cape peninsula and Hottentots Holland; and, from the extensive excavations I have made in it, I think I can safely say that it contains no fossils. The only minerals I have discovered are iron-pyrites and some oxides of iron of no value.
  Leaving the quartzose sandstone, I shall proceed briefly to describe the South African Upper Silurian Rocks, where the first signs of primeval life begin to appear. Many specimens of the fossils of this series have at various times found their way to Europe; but, as far as I am aware, no attempt has ever been made to show their position among the South African formations, which I shall now endeavour to do, however imperfectly.
   This Upper Silurian formation can be well traced in the Warm and Cold Bokkevelden, where it rests conformably on the above-described sandstones, and where its lowest strata contrast wonderfully with the rough gritty sandstone beds on which they repose. They consist principally of soft micaceous deposits, of various colours, abounding in small Trilobites, Crinoids, and Brachiopods, the fossils being frequently enclosed in small rounded nodules. Higher up in the series, the rocks are composed of a greyish sandstone containing numerous casts of Spirifers, which, from a fancied resemblance to the Butterfly, the Boers call Schoe- lappers.
   Next are found compact, blue, argillaceous schists, easily disintegrating when exposed to the sun, and abounding in Trilobites of a larger size, Conularia, Brachiopods, and other Mollusks. This subdivision is overlaid by a deposit resembling the lowest micaceous beds, but containing a much greater variety of Mollusks, as wrell as many specimens of the heads, bodies, and tails of a large species of Homalonotus. They are remarkable Trilohites with a hooked beak in front; hence I provisionally named them the “ hawksbill.”
   The next rock in superposition is a coarse red sandstone, of great thickness, containing numerous imbedded quartz-pebbles, much resembling the older sandstones of the Cape, and, like them, containing no fossils, as far as my researches
go. It is this rock which forms the elevated ranges of the Cedar Berg, Swarteberg, and Cold Bokkeveld mountains, attaining in some parts an elevation of 6840 feet above the sea. Its contortions and flexures are such as to bid defiance to any calculation of its thickness.
   On the flanks of those mountains is an extensive deposit, principally of fissile slates and sandstones, geologically higher, though locally lower, extending far into the Karoo, and containing many fossils of a similar nature to those already
described. These beds are the last and uppermost of the Upper Silurian seriesf, as developed in this country, and they disappear here under the zone of igneous rocks marked blue in the Map and Section, and which everywhere divides the palseozoic from the later and more northerly strata.
   I have not yet discovered a vestige of limestone, marble, or corals in these deposits. The Crinoids seem to have been plentiful enough, but are never found in a perfect state. The finest I ever saw crumbled to pieces in my endeavours to
extract it from the rock, so that I can show no better specimens than a few detached ossicles or joints.
   The further description of this line of Section, with its extensive Reptiliferous strata, I shall leave (as stated at p. 176) until I have first described all the other formations.
    SECTION NO. 2. (Plate XXI.)—From near Cape Recife to Lower Zeekoe River.
   The fundamental rock of all the country stretching from Gamtoos River-to the Great Fish River, and bounded to the northward by the Bothus Hill and Zuurberg Ranges, appears to be that of our Carboniferous Formation,
which lithologically differs but little from the quartzose sandstones of the Silurian (?) ranges of the western parts of the colony (except that the carboniferous rocks have no imbedded pebbles). This appearance led-to a mistake on my part in the description given in my letter of April 1844 (see above, p. 54), where I classed them all as belonging to the carboniferous system, but which opinion subsequent researches have proved to be erroneous : otherwise I believe that description to be perfectly correct, and to which I would now refer. The quartzose sandstone, which is the general characteristic of this formation, passes into chloritic schist at De Stade’s and Van Staaden’s Rivers, where rich mines of galena and copper-ore have been lately successfully worked.
  No workable coal has yet been discovered in this formation ; but I am told that numerous species of carboniferous plantsf have lately been found near the Kowie River in the talcose schist.
  The next rock in superposition is a claystone porphyry; but the description of this I shall defer for the present. Upon it rests a coarse Conglomerate, which has also been described in my former communication. It is here seen on the flank of the Zuurberg, and portions of it appear in Section No. 3, at Grob- belar’s Kloof, near Graham’s Town; also at Lange Kloof, and other parts of the district of George.
  Reposing conformably on this conglomerate is an exceedingly interesting group of rocks, which I have ventured to call the
	Lias(?),
from the prevalence of a characteristic liassic fossil, the Grypluea incurva\. This deposit does not seem to be anywhere extensively developed ; but, as a glance at the map will show, occupies only small indentations of the coast about the estuaries of our largest rivers. I know that more of these deposits than I have laid down exist along the coast, especially in Kafirland ; but, not being sufficiently acquainted with them, I have not given them a place in the map.
  I shall not attempt to describe the various fossil treasures of this highly interesting formation ; suffice it to say, that whole forests of calcified trees, of large size, are found in the neighbourhood of Sunday’s and Bushman’s Rivers, in a most perfect state of preservation, imbedded horizontally in the rock. Ferns, Zamias, and fragments of wood in a lignitic state, occur mixed up with fragments of gypsum and Reptilian bones, together with marine exuviae—Trigonia, Ammonites, and various other Mollusks, giving the formation, on the whole, perhaps more of an oolitic than a liassic character.
   Resting unconformably on the lias (?) and the older rocks along the coast, are several Tertiary Formations, principally of white calcareous rock, which I shall not attempt to describe, as I can neither correctly lay down their boundaries, nor has my experience among them qualified me to enter into particulars. They are probably of the Pliocene age, as they contain many specimens of Mollusks at present inhabiting the neighbouring seas. My collection contains a few specimens, principally from the eastern province, and one from Mossel Bay.
   Having now briefly described the rock-formations in the more southerly portions of the Sections Nos. 1 and 2, I shall pass over that part of No. 3 (Plate XXI.) which contains what has been already described until we reach the Clay stone Porphyry,
a description of which I attempted in my paper before referred to (supra, p. 54), as far as I then knew it to extend, viz. from the mouth of the Gualana River in Kafir- land to the Little Fish River in the Division of Somerset, a distance of eighty miles. I little dreamt then of its enormous extent, or to what important conclusions it would lead, fori have since traced it (with the exception of a small tract of country which I have had no opportunity of exploring, but through which I have no doubt it is continuous all the way, as above described) from the Gualana Mouth, behind the Zuurbergen and further along, and running nearly parallel to the Great Swartberg, Witteberg, and Cedarberg ranges, up to where my researches terminate, in a north-west direction as far as Hantam in the Clan William Division; a distance of nearly 600 miles. How much farther it may extend is a problem for future geologists to solve.
   This enormous igneous mass, as will be seen by the map and sections, rests on the carboniferous rocks in the eastern province, and in the western parts on the flanks of our Upper Silurian (?) ranges, running, like the mountain chains, generally nearly parallel to the coast. There can be no doubt that its former horizontal extent was much'greater than at present, for we find detached masses of it to the south of Governor’s Kop and Zuurberg (see Sections No. 3 and 2), and in the Cold Bokkeveld (see Section No. 1), having, according to my idea, covered all those immense mountain-masses before the period of their upheaval. I have no doubt also that many detached portions will be found to the south of the Great Swartberg chain ; but my acquaintance with that part of the country is too limited to enable me to point them out.
   In what manner could this extensive mass of igneous matter have been poured out on the surface of the earth, whose northern limit perhaps extends thousands of miles in the interior, and whose eastern termination must for ever remain a mystery? In vain have I searched for dykes, as the channels of eruption, such as are so plainly visible in the other trap-rocks of the country. It is true, that at its junction with the carboniferous schists in Albany the strata are frequently vertical, and even overlie the porphyry, and are much altered by heat (see Catalogue of Rocks of Section No. 3, specimen No. 14, marked A in the section), giving the latter the appearance of being the upheaving rocks. At Ecca Valley, however (marked B in Section No. 3), at Pluto’s Vale, and at Hantam, the opposite extreme, the reptiliferous beds rest conformably on the igneous rock, and no indications of heat are exhibited by those slates (as the specimens in the collection will show), the porphyry having evidently cooled before the deposition of the former; consequently this great zone of igneous rock cannot be an immense dyke, as might otherwise be. supposed.
   From'the numerous imbedded pebbles of granite, sandstone, quartz, and clay- slate, apparently not altered by heat, one might be led to believe that the whole was an aqueous deposit; but after inspecting the magnificent amorphous masses of hundreds of feet in height, as seen at Pluto’s Vale in Albany, Toverberg in the Western Karoo, and at Klip Rug in Hantam, with many other splendid sections, where not the smallest sign of stratification appears, that idea also falls to the ground.
   In this dilemma, I trust, I may not be considered visionary if I attribute the whole to the production of an immense volcano, which we may suppose to have existed somewhere near the junction of the Vaal and Orange Rivers, or perhaps about the site of the present Compass Berg, whose peak rises to the height of 10,000 feet above the sea-level ; and thence deluged with fiery billows the Silurian (?) plains, and spread ruin and desolation over the carboniferous forests for tens of thousands of square miles.
   Besides the imbedded pebbles, &c., above mentioned, I found at one place, near Zout Kloof in the Karoo, a great number of rounded calcareous nodules imbedded in this rock, from 3 inches to a foot in diameter, some of them being perfectly spherical, and resembling cannon-balls or bomb-shells; these balls I have never found in any other locality.	
  Having now described the claystone-porphyry along its whole line, I shall return to Section No. 1, where I have already entered on that part of the colony known as the Great Karoo Desert, which, from the Praam Berg, in Hantam, to the Sunday’s River, in Graaff Reinet Division, scarcely contains the permanent residence of a dozen families. It may be considered altogether as a great hill-studded plain, bounded on the west by the Cedar Berg and Swart Rug, and on the south by the Witte Berg, Great Swarte Berg, and Blauw Berg, very prominent mountain- ranges. The elevated plateaux of Hantam, Roggeveld, Nieuwveld, and Snieuw Berg form its inland boundaries. In the summer, with the few exceptions above mentioned, it is quite uninhabited, being a perfectly arid desert; but the autumnal rains cause the vegetation to spring forth so rapidly, that in the course of a few days it is (as if by magic) suddenly converted into a perfect flower-garden, and yields abundant herbage for cattle and sheep, so that all the Boers from the surrounding highlands descend to the plains below during the winter months, living in tents, surrounded by their families, flocks, and herds in true patriarchal simplicity.
  This immense desert, as well as the whole tract coloured by different shades of green in the Map (Plate XX.), would appear from geological evidence to have been once occupied by an enormous lake or sea. The fauna and flora of this perhaps isolated inland sea are now represented by the plant-remains buried in its finely laminated deposits, and by the singular family of Dicynodonts and other peculiar ancient reptiles, who here sported about in a world of their own.
  I shall now proceed briefly to describe these Reptiliferous strata.
  The first or lowest deposit is a finely-laminated, blue, argillaceous rock, being invariably the same all along the margin, from Hantam to the Great Fish River, reposing conformably on the claystone-porphyry, and quite unaltered by heat. A narrow band of soft white slaty rock succeeds to this, which is succeeded by an extensive bed similar to the first, but containing abundance of plant-remains.
  The only fault I have ever discovered in this country is found among those slaty beds where they begin to alternate with sandstones at Buffels River, as shown in Section 7 (Plate XXI.). Near this part also the rocks are very much contorted, which does not appear to be the case where the three general sections pass through the reptiliferous strata.
  In my communication of 1844, before the idea struck me of the lacustrine origin of these rocks, I have already described the other divisions of the formation, which I need not here repeat, as the specimens in my collection of 1847 will illustrate the whole, there being no difference in all the three sections traversing the reptiliferous series.
   I ought, however, to add, that I discovered a number of fossil plants (PI. XXVIII. fig. 1) in the Middle Roggeveld, which I have not met with in the more eastern sections, and two specimens of which I send with my present collection. These occur in the sandstone and schistose strata of that locality to the thickness of 1200 feet. They somewhat resemble the Asterophyllites of the coal-measures, and, like the Sphagnum palustre of the peat-bogs, seem to have thrown out fresh branches as the lower parts became enveloped in mud. I arrived at this conclusion by finding the plants invariably in a vertical position, and the stalk passing through several distinct beds of stratification, with something at the bottom resembling roots.
   Among the fossil plants of Roggeveld, a species of Lycopodium ? was frequently recognized, but could not be extracted from the rock. At Little Table Mountain, Kleine Roggeveld, I discovered the silicified stem of a large tree about 20 feet long, and in a very perfect state of preservation.
   Towards the northern end of Section No. 3, I discovered in 1846 an extensive tract of country which, in addition to the remains of Dicynodonts and other reptiles, contained great masses of siliceous wood, imbedded in its horizontally stratified white sandstones, together with thin beds of coal. None of the coal-beds, of a quality fit for use, were thick enough to be worked. It is frequently anthracitic, and much of it is deficient in bitumen.
   At Wittebergen, near the upper branches of the Orange River, I found a large sandstone slab, of about 8 feet square, with the branch of a tree imbedded therein, in all its beautiful and extensive ramifications, just as it grew, the wood having completely partaken of the nature of its siliceous matrix ; it was, however, impossible to remove this splendid fossil.
   A remarkable feature in the geology of South Africa is the immense numbers of Trap Dikes
that reticulate throughout the whole of the reptiliferous strata ; their erupted matter, on reaching the surface, being generally found capping the highest mountains, with huge irregular prismatic columns. The most wonderful of these dikes is that gigantic mass which protrudes from the Spitzkop, as seen in Section No. 2, Plate XXI., and rises to the height of 10,000 feet above the sea. The horizontality of the stratified rocks is never in the least disturbed by the intrusion of the trap ; nor are faults, as in Europe, produced by this cause: the only difference it makes is in indurating or honeycombing the strata through which it passes. At Spitzkop, above mentioned, the sandstone in contact with the huge dike is metamorphosed for a distance of 40 or 50 yards, and sometimes converted into perfect hexagonal columns. The slaty rocks likewise, which are within its influence, from being of a dark blue colour, have been changed to black, much resembling in appearance fine-grained basalt. There are many smaller dikes in various parts of the country, protruding through the sandstone in a similar manner, and shaped like the Spitzkop. These also, being harder than the horizontal strata, have longer withstood the action of the elements, which have disintegrated and worn away the softer sedimentary deposits.
  I have endeavoured to show some of the principal dikes in the sections, but have not attempted it in the map; for, without a proper survey of the whole country, even an approximation to the truth could not be attained, as the dikes appear to run in every direction, forming an irregular network, which would only disfigure the map, and look like a confused mass of roads.
  Having now briefly, though very imperfectly, sketched the different formations of South Africa, and to the best of my ability laid down the same on my map and sections (PI. XX. XXI.) in such a manner as, I trust, will be intelligible, it will be seen that I have been so far successful in tracing at least a part of the Dicyn- odon’s habitat, with that of the other wonderful reptiles with remains of which my collections abound. The existence of a great lake or inland sea, occupying the major part of the South African promontory, was never once dreamt of by me when I first discovered those singular relics, but subsequent researches have convinced me that such was the case, and moreover that the period of its existence was shortly after the deposition of what I have called in this sketch the “ Carboniferous formation,” the “ claystone-porphyry ” only intervening between it and the Reptiliferous deposits. I have arrived at the conclusion of the lacustrine origin of this extensive area from the following facts, viz.:—
  1st. The genera] uniformity and homogeneity of the deposits.
  2nd. The great abundance of fossil wood, and the similarity of the vegetable remains found throughout the range of these beds.
  3rd. The large quantity of freshwater plants traversing the strata in the vertical position on the spot where they grew.
  4th. The peculiar characters of the reptiles found fossil in these strata, and unknown elsewhere.
  5th. The general absence of marine exuviae, and the presence of small freshwater shells.

   In my former communication of 1844, so frequently alluded to, I offered some conjectures as to the probable age of the Reptiliferous strata, being in a great measure misled in the opinion then offered by having received an Ammonites planulatus, said to have been found in situ by the donor at the foot of the Spitzkop; circumstances which I need not here relate, coupled with a subsequent better acquaintance of that elevated part of the country, led to the discovery that this was quite a mistake,—the fossil having been brought from Europe. Professor Owen appears to consider the Bidental Reptiles to be of the age of the New Red Sandstone; and, from extensive researches made among the Reptiliferous strata since the transmission of my first collection to England, at which time I erroneously assigned to them an Oolitic origin, I now perfectly concur with the learned Professor, that they are at least as old as, if not older than the New Red period.
   I have in my possession a fine specimen of the heierocercal tail of a fish, found at Styl Krantz in the upper Reptiliferous slates; and I have seen various other ichthyolites of a similar description, found near Fort Beaufort in the lowest part of the same formation ;—and perhaps, from the presumed palaeozoic character of such fish-remains, we may find another argument in favour of the inference that these beds are at least as old as the New Red Sandstone.
   But I am inclined to assign to them even an older date. Although I have classed my “ Carboniferous formation” among the marine formations, yet I am by no means certain that they are such, for no marine exuviae, as far as I am aware, have ever been discovered in them. Lithologically they differ much from the Carboniferous series of Europe, but I think they are their true African equivalents ; and the great resemblance between their fossil flora and that of my “lacustrine ” deposits which contain such extensive beds of coal, even in their upper parts, irresistibly lead me to the conclusion that they are also nearly related to the Carboniferous series, and hence that the Dicynodon, with its numerous and wonderful congeners, are amongst the oldest of reptiles.
   Before concluding, I shall offer a few general remarks on the Superficial deposits of South Africa.
   Very extensive deposits of calcareous Tufa are found along the coast (see Section No. 4) ; these are composed principally of the detritus of the Tertiary formations, which I have no doubt at a former period everywhere fringed the coast. In some places it attains a thickness of upwards of 100 feet, and contains imbedded shells of the common land-snail in great abundance, as well as various recent animal and vegetable remains. At Cape Agulhas the new lighthouse has been built of this rock, but it is generally used merely for lime-burning.
   Thin beds of calcareous tufa are also found overlying the Reptiliferous strata in all parts of the interior, and are invariably used by the inhabitants for lime, there being no regular stratified limestones in South Africa.
   The Cango Cavernsf in the Division of Ceorge are famous for their large and beautiful stalactites and stalagmites, which afford a very pure carbonate of lime, much superior to the tufas. Smaller caves of the same are found in different parts of the colony.
   Frequently, resting on the above or on the older rocks below, are found beds of recent marine shells exactly the same as those at present inhabiting the Indian and Atlantic Oceans,—some specimens accompany my collection of 1847. I have found them near the mouth of the Great Fish River, Kowie, Port Elizabeth, Van Staaden’s River, Mossel Bay, and Lion’s Head, Cape Town (see Section, No. 4) and they are also to be seen all along our western coast. In some parts they occur in beds of considerable thickness, imbedded in loose sand mixed up with bones of recent land-animals, and even many specimens of native pottery and other works of man ; so that this raised beach, for such it must be, has been uplifted to its present height during the historical period. Its height varies from 20 to 300 feet above the sea-level.
   A superficial ferruginous deposit, which is found in the greatest abundance on the Cape Flats, and there covering the clayslate, consists of an oxide of iron, derived either from the clayslates themselves or from the neighbouring sandstone mountains. In some places it reaches the thickness of 10 feet, and is much used for road-purposes. This ironstone is found in small patches on many of the marine formations throughout the colony. At Kalga Springs, near Port Elizabeth, it is curious to observe the ferruginous deposits forming and indurating, as it were, before our eyes, as the water charged with the iron flows away from the source; this is illustrated by some specimens in my collection of 1847.
   Hot, tepid, and cold chalybeate springs are found in various parts of the colony, and are much resorted to by the inhabitants as a cure for all diseases. None of them appear to be of volcanic origin, the existence of true volcanic rocks being unknown in this country.
   On the Cape Flats, near Tygerberg, I discovered in 1846 a small bed of white sandstone, resting unconformably on the clayslate, and containing beautiful casts or impressions of what I took to be fucoids. My late talented friend Col. Michell, our former Surveyor-General, kindly took home some specimens, which he presented to the Society in my name.
   The Rev. Dr. Adamson, now in England, informed me last year that he had, some time ago, discovered in the neighbourhood of Wynberg, some stalk-like bodies in a small bed of white sandstone, also resting on the clayslate, perhaps of the same age as the Fucoidal bodies above mentioned. Some specimens which he showed me were very obscure. My present collection contains a specimen of what resembles a Calamite (?), which I got at BufFeljugts River, near Swellendam, also in white sandstone, lying on the clayslate.
   I ought perhaps also to mention that I have frequently heard of animal remains being discovered in the alluvium, differing from those of existing animals; and I discovered at Bloemhoff in the Division of Graaf Reinet, about 10 feet below the surface, in a marly alluvial soil, some remains of an extinct ruminant, consisting of a skull, with the core of one horn attached, the former being of an extraordinary length in proportion to its breadth. It forms part of the collection of 1847, and must speak for itself.
   I have no doubt that a diligent search in the deep ruts or ravines that everywhere intersect the great plains of the interior would produce a vast number of extinct mammalian remains perfectly new to science.

