
The cornbrash limestone on the Scarborough coast is a "thin and unimportant rock," which cannot be applied to any useful purpose : it has certainly been sometimes injudiciously used to repair our highways, a practice we hope will be discontinued, as much better road-stone may be more easily obtained. But that this " thin and unimportant rock " is not deficient in interest to the enquiring geologist, the following catalogue of its organic remains will amply testify. Commencing at Gristhorpe Cliffs, and, with some interruptions, terminating at Ewe-nab, (a wider range than Mr. Phillips has 
assigned it), we meet with little to reward our labours ; the stone is of a bluish grey colour, and rises in shapeless masses, full of shells laid in every direction, and strongly cemented together, so that it is almost impossible to obtain a perfect specimen. A blue shale covers this rock, and may be met with four or five times within the above-named limits. It contains several fossils rarely found in the bed below, particularly Sanguinolaria parvula, Cardium latum, Isocardia triangularis, Belemnites tornatilis, Astacus rostratus and Birdii ; the two last are in nodules which occur in the greatest abundance. Proceeding onwards we again meet with the cornbrash on the north side of the Castle Hill, and it finally disappears before reaching Peaseholm Beck. To the left of the bathing-place the same blue shale occurs as at Mill Bay, containing the same fossils ; but our favourite locality is opposite Harland's cottage, where most of the fossils recorded in the following pages have been obtained : the stone is here of a reddish colour, not so coarse-grained, contains fewer organic remains, but in a better state of preservation. The minerals met with in this stratum are iron pyrites, lenticular 
calcareous spar, and common iron glance. 
When the ' Illustrations of the Geology of Yorkshire ' was published, the cabinets in this place contained only thirty-seven species of cornbrash fossils ; our collection now amounts to one hundred and thirty-four, all procured by our own exertions. To this we attach some importance, after having witnessed with regret the extent to which fossil-making has been carried in this neighbourhood : and (we say it " more in sorrow than in anger") such impositions have not always been confined to ignorant and mercenary dealers. We cannot close this article without returning our kindest thanks to Miss Travis for the correct and elegant drawings which illustrate this paper. 


