TEHRAN stands on an alluvial plain consisting- chiefly of debris of limestone and trap rocks, (see Map, p. 381.) The high range immediately to the north of the city is composed of fine-grained lithographic limestone ; the strata dipping to the north and resting upon porcelain-stone, which passes into serpentine and porphyretic claystonef. The hills to the south-east of Tehran and overhanging the ruins of the city of Rai, are formed of limestone reposing on trap.
  From Tehran the soft, lithographic limestone extends nearly to the village of Demavend; but the sandstone of the subjacent coal-formation is occasionally exposed. A little to the westward of the village, the ground rises considerably ; and in the ranges of mountains, both north and south of the road, as far eastward as the caravanserai of Dalee chaee, nothing is seen but limestone resting on trap. In the bed of the river, we passed some upraised strata of altered shale, resembling coked coal; and upon the opposite bank we observed a loose conglomerate of fragments of limestone and trap, imbedded in what appeared to be dried mud, or detritus of the above-mentioned limestone.
Here I found portions of two small ammonites in fragments of a compact limestone*, but I know not to what formation they originally belonged.
  Above the caravanserai of Ameenabad, limestone, superimposed on trap, again occurs. The river Gazan-chaee runs through a great thickness of the loose conglomerate. The plain of Ferooz-kooh is amygdaloidal basalt; and the hills in the neighbourhood consist of limestone resting upon it; having, on some of their summits, more or less of the above conglomerate.
  Leaving Ferooz-kooh, and passing the summit of the highest range of the Elboorz, we found to the north of the snow, shale and sandstone of a coal formation, resting upon limestone. At that point commences a deep fissure, through which the river Talar flows, till it escapes into the plain of the Caspian. At Abbassabad the ravine opens a little, and discloses sandstone; but the river is soon again confined between precipices. The sections of strata, however, on the opposite sides show very little resemblance.
  Asmall stream entering on the right bank deposits much calcareous sinter and what is called oriental alabaster, an imperfectly crystallized calcareous spar.
  Below Pul-i-Suffeed the rocks are chiefly conglomerates, formed from the debris of the mountains, and united by a calcareous deposit. Where the summits of the adjacent mountains were visible, they appeared to be composed of limestone.
  As we still descended the stream, the stones forming the conglomerate became smaller, rounder, and more firmly cemented, including rolled pebbles of quartz and granite, and minute fragments of shells, probably the remains of an ancient sea beach.
  For a considerable way, the river flows at the bottom of an exceedingly deep and narrow gorge, which divides perpendicularly thick beds of conglomerate and limestone, the road (Shah Abas’s causeway) leading along the face of the precipice, many hundred feet above the stream.
  It is remarkable, that we owe the preservation of this important and almost only remaining portion of that great work, to the firm manner in which the calcareous dripping from the mountain-side has cemented the stones together.
  Below Sheergah the country becomes open and the soil deep and clayey ; and, passing Aliabad bazaar, we met with nothing but mud and jungle, till we reached the Caspian.
   Along the shore of this sea are innumerable trunks of large trees, half imbedded in the mud and sand of the beach, and brought down, in time of floods, by the numerous rapid rivers which flow from the richly-wooded ravines of Mazunderan, Ghitan Talish, Carabaugh, &c. If I may judge from the number of trees which I saw a single river hurrying down its torrent in the spring of 1839, the quantity of wood annually carried into the Caspian must be enormous.
   The waters of this inland sea, near the shore, are so fresh, that a horse does not refuse to drink them. The shells on the beach are chiefly fresh-water helices, cockle-shells, &c.
   There is a high and low water-mark on the shore, not the effect of tides, but produced either by the occasional set of winds, or from the basin of the Caspian being fuller at one season than another, in consequence of rains or the snows melting on the surrounding mountains.
   The sea is evidently fast filling up; and so great is the quantity of mud brought down by the rivers in spring and autumn, that it is easy to trace their discoloured waters five or six miles from the land; and so shallow is the Caspian near the shore, that ships of 120 tons burden, coming to the coast of Mazunderan, are obliged to anchor at the distance of two or three leagues.
   Leaving the alluvial plain of Mazunderan, and ascending from A mol, the bed of the river Heraz, the road again enters a ravine in well-wooded mountains composed of sandstone strata resting upon limestone. As we proceeded, the limestone was exhibited overlying claystone porphyry. Thence, as far as Karoo, the rocks appeared in the sections in the following order : trap—limestone—sandstone—shale and indurated slate-clay—Buhr-stone—then sandstone, limestone, trap.
   On the tops of some of the hills, there is much loose trap-rock rapidly undergoing decomposition.
   At Karoo is a breccia similar to that at Dalee chaee. The bend of the river between Karoo and Bulkulum is in a narrow, deep fissure through a mountain of limestone, with a few strata of coal and sandstone distinguishable on the top of the precipice.
   On this line of road are many ruined bridges, and portions of broken masonry; also remains of roads, now impassable; but, in this narrow fissure, the ruins of a stone bridge were too remarkable not to attract attention. The piers, built on the solid rock of the opposite sides of the river, seemed as if they could never have been intended to support the same arch, so different was 
their parallel. Upon inquiry, I found that this, like almost all the bridges and galleries on the road, had been destroyed (and the opposite sides of the ravine had no doubt suffered displacement) by a tremendous earthquake, which occurred about eleven or twelve years before, and destroyed an immense number of villages, and rendered the road totally impassable for nearly two years. On the more eastern line of route, we saw the destructive effects of the same earthquake, in the almost total ruin of the caravanserai of Jajerood, the ruin of a handsome mosque at the village of Demavend, and the destruction of other buildings, as far as Sarree.
  As we advanced, the ravine opened a little, and, about a mile below the village of Bulkulum, a lofty hill, rising in a precipice of 900 or 1000 feet from the water’s edge, presented a fine section of perpendicular beds of coal, of which, together with a few strata of sandstone, the whole hill is composed. On the right or opposite bank, the sandstone strata are nearly horizontal.
  For five or six miles above this place, the strata are often most curiously disturbed, and twisted in every direction. Atone point on the right bank, a section showed the sandstone and shale bent to within a few degrees of completing a circle.
  Below the Abi Noor, a stream running in a small valley which opens to view the peak of Demavend, the before-mentioned loose breccia occurs—and higher up is sandstone; while at Usk, and a little below it, calcareous tuff from hot springs covers every thing. The temperature of one large sulphureous spring, two miles E. by N. of Usk, and bubbling up from the summit of a hill of calc tufa, was 84° of Fahrenheit, that of the air being 48°. The inhabitants say, that there are many hot and cold medicinal springs in the neighbourhood of Usk, and that there is one of perfectly pure and tasteless water about three miles off, on the side of the mountain Demavend, hot enough to boil eggs. Half-way up the mountain, sulphur is stated to occur in great abundance and purity.
  From one of the hot springs in the little capital of Usk, I procured some small, rough, siliceous globules, which are deposited in number by the water; and I have been told, that in Khorasan, where similar siliceous globules are formed by the hot springs, the inhabitants sort them, and use them as shot.
  Above Usk, the river runs in a deep rent in greenstone. The first streamlet which flows into it, from the direction of Mount Demavend, is loaded with iron derived from the iron-shot greenstone; above which, there appear to be other, softer iron ores.
  The greenstone continued till we arrived near the tomb of Em Zadeh Ha- shim, where it gradually passes into claystone, and underlies limestone. The Neighbouring hills, surveyed from this height, appear to be all composed of limestone resting on trap. Here our circuit ended.
   I have only further to remark, that, from the top of the range down to the alluvial plain of Mazunderan, there is little in the course of the two rivers, the Tatar and the Heraz, which can be attributed to the mere action of running- water. Both ravines, especially that from Demavend to Amol, are continuous rents from the top to the bottom of the range; and, narrow though they be, it would be difficult to point out a single spot, where a correspondence of the strata on the opposite sides of the ravine exists. They have evidently been shifted by the successive convulsions which have elevated the range; an agent which we have seen to be still in operation.
   I gave up as hopeless all attempts to note the angle and direction of the dip of the strata, as they vary continually, and, on the opposite sides of the river, I may almost say, never correspond. I am thus forced to content myself with stating the general direction of the dip to be north somewhat east.


