   My object in the following paper is to describe some of the more general characters of Dykes, such as I have lately observed them in the North of Ireland.
   I do not know exactly within what geographical limits these curious geological phenomena are to be met with : they are common on the Western coast and in the Isles of Scotland, and I have observed them also in the Isle of Man. I understand that none have yet been remarked in the South of Ireland, and I did not observe any in the Midland counties through which I passed between Dublin and the Northern coast. In England they have been found in the centre of the island, as at the colliery of Tividale in Staffordshire; but in the North of Ireland it is only on the verge of the coast that they abound, and it is there that I have principally examined them. Of more than sixty that I noticed, nearly half were situated on the shore; those which occur in the mountains of Donegal are I believe the remotest from the sea, and those lie within fifteen miles of it.
   I have not found their occurrence to depend upon the absolute elevation of the country in which they appear. I have observed them at almost every altitude between that of the shore and those which I have inserted in the following Table, as being the greatest and somewhat uncommon.
   It seldom happens in the North of Ireland that dykes occur singly; but they are generally found in groups, several within a short distance of-one another. Thus, at the Giant’s Causeway there are 6 within 2 English miles; at the collieries of Ballycastle 5 within the same distance ; at Alt-a-dora (a glen in the valley of Dunlughy) 4 within 1 mile; on the N. W. side of Arragh, 6 within 1042 feet; and at Church home in the basin of Dunlughy, 4 within 835 feet.
   The uniform direction or parallelism of nearly all the dykes in the North of Ireland is a curious circumstance resulting from my observations : I have subjoined a list of all the dykes that I surveyed with accuracy, in order to put the Society in possession of the data from which I have drawn this conclusion. Many of those in the table were surveyed with a theodolite, others with a very good pocket compass mounted on agate; in all the latter cases I have allowed for a variation of 29° West, upon the authority of Mr. Hanton of Loch-beg in the Rosses, who made two observations at my request in order to determine the point. I have rejected from this table the bearings of all the dykes, which I observed with only a common pocket compass, as not having any pretensions to accuracy; and among these the bearings of the famous dykes of the Giant’s Causeway; had all however been admitted, they would all have tended to establish the above-mentioned conclusion.
   The conclusion to be drawn from this table is that the bearing of the dykes is from S. E. to N. W., and that the dykes all cut the planes of the strata through which they pass, at very considerable angles.	.
   A shift in the direction of a dyke is an accident of rare occurrence ; it would probably however be more frequently observed, did not the soil, which covers the surface, prevent us from tracing the dyke to any distance.
   The most considerable shift that I ever observed was at Rannagh Point in the Isle of Arran-mor, where it was not less than 47 0 in 126 feet. At Muir-a-Bole on the N.W. side of Arragh, I observed two other considerable shifts; the one of 22°, the other of 27°.
   Dykes differ greatly from one another in their widths, which measure from a few inches to several hundred feet. The latter dimensions are of rare occurrence, and I have only met with three cases of the kind, all in secondary strata ; and in two of these the enlargement took place at the bottom of the dyke. One is found in the red bay of Cushendall; the other at Pool-a-Phuca in the county of Fermanagh. The third case occurs between Portrush and Dunbar Castle on the coast of Antrim, and has been noticed by Dr. Richardson. I think I have ascertained that there is a remarkable difference in the average widths of the dykes, according as they are found in primitive or secondary rocks. Out of sixty- two dykes that I have measured, the average width of thirty-eight in the primitive districts is 9 feet; that of twenty-four in the secondary is 24 feet.
   I have already noticed some of the more remarkable elevations at which dykes have been found. The height to which a dyke rises above the surface of the stratum, which it intersects, is some times very considerable. That on the N.W. side of Arragh rises perpendicularly 40 feet, like a partition wall; that on the cupola of Bally-ghuia 8 or 10 feet; at Scrabo Hill near Newtown Ards in the county of Down a dyke appears like a standing pillar at the entrance of one of the freestone quarries. The dyke of Port-na- brock near the Giant’s Causeway, juts out into the sea quite isolated to the visible extent of 372 feet. On the contrary, those on the summits of Glendoun, Glencarn, and Aghla-mor, appear like strewed masses, scattered about upon the surface. These might be adduced as instances to prove the wearing away of mountains, if that point stood in need of any additional confirmation.
   The depth to which the dykes descend is unknown ; and after having observed the sections of a great many along the coast in cliffs from 50 to 400 feet in height, I have not been able to ascertain (except in one or two cases) that their sides converge or have a wedgeform tendency ; so that no estimate can be formed of the depth at which they terminate. In this respect therefore they do not seem to agree with the metallic veins.
   Moreover, I have not observed that they branch off into slender strings, or (except in some very rare instances) that they swell into (what the miners term) bellies, after the manner of the metallic veins.
   The dykes, whether they occur in primitive or secondary countries are nearly vertical. The mean angle of deviation from the perpendicular deduced from nine cases occurring in primitive rocks was 13°, the extremes being 9° and 20°. The same angle deduced from ten other cases was 7° to the N.E. But I am not warranted in drawing any general conclusion as to what point of the compass and in what degree they deviate. The angle of deviation in the two remarkable dykes on Arragh mountain is somewhat considerable, as is also that of the dyke in the quarries of Scrabo hill; but I am not able to state it with precision.
   There is not that variety in the substance of the dykes, that their numbers, their distance from one another, and the varied nature of the rocks which they intersect would lead one to expect. I have found them composed of the following rocks, which are introduced in the order of their most frequent occurrence. Trap and greenstone, with their associates Lydian stone, flinty slate, greystone and wacke.
   I have seen but one dyke of clay porphyry, viz. at Farland point in Donegal, and I conceive it to be altogether of a different class from those dykes to which my principal attention has been given in the present paper.
   A dyke is formed either of a number of diminutive pillars aggregated together, or of square rhomboidal pieces piled one upon another like blocks of masonry, the long axes of these figures in either case lying transverse, and perpendicular to the walls of the dyke. These regular figures are often much disintegrated and rounded, and sometimes assume the coated form; the two appearances being often united in the same portion of rock.
   Dykes are not, like metallic veins, divided into regular layers of different stony substances; nor do we find in them those drusy cavities which sometimes occupy the middle of metallic veins.
   The more compact the trap, the more apt is it to assume the polyhedral form, to be homogeneous, and to be free from the por- phyritic texture. In the hard variety I never found imbedded any detached mineral concretions, except a few small specks of soft green steatite. When less compact, it is often set more or less thickly with heterogeneous nodules, but seldom so abundantly as to assume a texture decidedly porphyritic. Among these nodules I have found the following minerals.
   The mean specific gravity of the trap rocks forming dykes may be rated at about 2.86. That of the specimens from Alt-a-dara, containing olivine, being 3.14; that of homogeneous trap from the dykes of the Giant’s Causeway being 2.99; and that of the wacke from the shore at Carrick-fergus being 2.45.
   The dykes are found traversing both the primitive and the secondary rocks, nor have I ascertained in which they are the most frequent. There appears to be no regular connexion between the substance of the dyke and the rock through which it passes. I have however sometimes found lime in considerable quantity in the dykes that traverse limestone. Glassy felspar I have only found in the dykes of primitive rocks.
   In the table of the observations of the dykes some of the rocks cut by them are enumerated; I have added however another table of the rocks that I have seen intersected, with some additional localities.
   The induration which the secondary rocks undergo when traversed by dykes has often been noticed; it is not my intention now to discuss this subject; I shall only mention that the induration does not extend far from the dyke, and that the phenomena though very frequent are not universal. I have only noticed one instance of remarkable change in a primitive rock contiguous to a dyke. In the case I allude to, viz. in the lead mine of Kildrim in the county of Donegal, mica slate adjacent to the dyke had its texture quite loosened, and was in a dusty state. 
   The white limestone when thus indurated becomes, as is well known, phosphorescent. I have found limestone, accompanying the undoubted lavas of Andcrnach in the Palatinate, and containing garnets and augite, not to possess this property.
   In general there is no foreign matter between the substance of the dyke and the rock it divides, excepting a slight rusty appearance on the surface of the latter. The contact between the two is pretty close, but they may always be disjoined by the blow of a hammer. When the dyke is prismatic, a hollow interval between the two may sometimes be observed.
   Since the average direction of the dykes is from south-east to north-west, and since the average dip of the strata in the north of Ireland is to the south-east, it will follow (independently of the several observations on the bearings of the strata contained in the table) that the direction of the dykes is nearly perpendicular to that of the strata.
   Moreover since the longitudinal vallies and the metallic veins of a district are generally parallel to one another, and to the direction of the strata which they intersect, it will follow that the dykes will cross the longitudinal vallies, and that where metalliferous veins and dykes occur together, that one of the two will cut the other. This is the case at the lead mine of Kildrim in Donegal, where the dyke divides the vein. Similar facts are recounted in the Philosophical Transactions, 1790, page 93, by Mr. Mills, as occurring at the lead mines of Persabus and Glasgow-beg in the isle of Ilay ; where although the directions of the dykes are not uniform, as in the north of Ireland, yet they cut the veins nearly at right angles.
   M. Brongniart as well as Dr. Richardson from whom he quotes, (Irish Trans. Vol. 9, page 22,) appears to have misunderstood this passage, and adduces it to prove that dykes are traversed by lead veins, the reverse being the case : Traite de Mineralogie, tom.l. p.462. He also quotes some observations said to be made by M. Humboldt on the basalt of Unkeln, from Journal des Mines, No. 19, p. 378, to prove that dykes are sometimes metalliferous; but it does not appear on referring to that number that dykes are there spoken of, nor indeed does the reporter appear to have been satisfied with the expression “raies metalliques” or to have relied much on the accuracy of the observations.
   It is very evident from these observations that some of the dykes at least were formed at a later period than the metallic veins; an inference that might be extended to all, could we show them to be all cotemporaneous. That they are so is rendered probable by their parallelism, and by the nearly uniform texture of the trap, in whatever rock the dyke is found. The simple minerals too contained in the trap favour this opinion. Calcareous and heavy- spar, and lime intimately mixed with the trap abound most in the dykes of secondary rocks; iron pyrites is common to those both of primitive and secondary districts; and radiated zeolite, olivine and augite are common to the dykes of primitive rocks and to the beds of trap of secondary formation.	
   From this inference, however, I must except a class of dykes which run parallel to the metallic veins, and are probably intersected by that class of dykes which I have been describing in the present paper. An example of this new class of dykes is found at Farland point in the county of Donegal, where alternating strata of slaty quartz and sienite are traversed by a dyke of clay porphyry bearing east of north 21°: a dyke of trap is found at the same place bearing west of north 49°, the angle between the two being 100°. There can be no doubt that they meet one another, but the spot being covered by the sea, I could not discover the point of intersection.
   Whatever date and whatever agents we are disposed to assign to the origin of dykes, their uniformly-vertical and nearly parallel positions evince that both they and the mountains which they intersect have not undergone any modern disturbance beyond superficial abrasion, but that they remain in the same situation as at the remote period at which they were formed.


