  MY DEAR SIR,
I HAD long cherished, as you already know, a desire of visiting Germany, that country of true Geology, for the purpose of viewing there the classical points, of retracing the observations already made, and of becoming acquainted with the ideas of the numerous geologists of my native country. That desire has been gratified; and it is with pleasure that I lay before you a short account of the results of my inquiries.
Germany has been visited by so many geologists, and so many parts of thafVast empire have been so minutely described, that one might imagine the geologist, in order to acquire a perfect knowledge of the country, had only to compare it with the description in his hand. This had also been my idea; and, indeed, I have to say, that almost all that I have seen is recorded in the annals of science, or is now known to the German geologists. But I found that all had not been described with sufficient accuracy, nor examined from every possible point of view; and, particularly, that the various deposits had not in all cases been properly classified, from ignorance of the true structure of other countries. So that, if I was not a little surprised to find new facts, or neglected appearances, in localities very often visited by geologists, I was,- on the other hand, able to replace some deposits in their true geognostical places; and from this kind of review, I learned more than I could haye done in travelling over an unknown country.
  An ample detail of the numerous interesting points visited during this long journey shall be sent at another time, my object at present being only to lay before you the principal results of my observations in open field, and in public and private collections, and of a friendly intercourse with many eminent men.
  As I have seen in this journey all the principal formations of which the crust of the Earth seems to be composed, J shall communicate my ideas on the series of Formations, dwelling particularly upon those which present the most obscurity or interest, and speaking first of the stratified rocks, and afterwards of the unstratified ones.
  I. STRATIFIED ROCKS.
  1. Primitive Hocks.
The Primitive class seems to contain only two kinds or stratified formations, Gneiss and Mica-slate, of which,
even the first predominates in a great degree over the other, (Erzgebirge, Bohmerwaldgebirge, primitive chain between Austria, Styria, and Hungary, and the primitive country of the centre of France). It is yet possible that there may exist some varieties of primitive clay-slate as subordinate beds; but in the whole of Germany, the Clayslate, taken for primitive, I pronounce to be Transition, and to pass insensibly into Greywacke, (the Hartz, the Frankenwald, the Erzgebirge, the Carpathians, the Mountains on both sides of the Rhine from Bingen to Bonn, &c.)
  2. Transition Rocks.
The Clay-slate Formation is improperly so called; for this rock, as in Scotland and England, forms only a very small part, or, in other terms, only subordinate masses, in the extensive deposits of a great variety of rocks, produced by the various mixture of quartz, talc or mica, or chlorite, felspar, and a little calc-spar, or limestone. Such rocks are found, for instance, in the Alps of Savoy, on the banks of the Rhine, in the Erzgebirge, the Carpathians, and in the middle part of Bohemia, where these rocks are extremely interesting, by being composed of distinctly aggregated materials, and by their containing many subordinate beds or masses of various clay-slates impregnated with silica, or, in other words, of varieties of flinty slate and Lydianstone.
  To these oldest transition-rocks, succeeds the Greywacke Formation, as, for example, in the Hartz, the Frankenwald, the chain of hills between Silesia, Bohemia, and Moravia. In these two transition-formations, the limestone forms here and there a series of separate deposits, placed on a line parallel to the general direction of the schistose beds; and when these series are numerous, they seem to be, as in the primitive class of rocks, pretty parallel to each other. Sometimes the limestone concretions are very extensive.
  
  3. Flaetz Rocks.
The Flcetz period begins with the Old Red Sandstone-, {fires rouge). This sandstone is ordinarily red, generally coarse at first, and afterwards finer: it appears often to be chiefly derived from the disintegration of porphyries, sye* nites, and granites. In it (as in Silesia), under it (Valley of Tharandt, near Dresden), or upon it (in the Palatinate), occur more or less extensively the coal-sandstones, or coalmeasures, having some fresh water shells, and sometimes salt and fresh water organic remains, in different parts of the deposit, but never together in the same bed. In some instances, the sandstone of the coal-formation occupies the greatest part of this formation, as in the Prussian and Bavarian Rhine provinces.
  Upon this deposit rests the Zechstein, or Magnesian Limestone, or Calcaire Alpin *; for all these denominations, and the deposits which they indicate, are identical, their various masses and their petrifactions being the same. The Asche of the Germans, and their Limestone, with Sparry Iron-ore (Schmalkalden), is the Calcaire Alpin of the south of France, near Figeae, for instance, a locality described long ago by CORDIER {Journal desMines). The Zechstein of the country of Swarzburg, Kamsdorf, Gera, &c. is precisely the Magnesian Limestone, with flustrae, &c. of Sunderland, and also the Calcaire Alpin Magnesien of the south of France. In Germany, the lowest part of this deposit contains ores, which, in France, are found in the uppermost part of the Old Red Sandstone, as at Chessy. And even in Germany, the Weissliegende, or uppermost part of the Old Red Sandstone, now and then contains these ores, (Eisleben). In England, they are perhaps very feebly indicated in the coal-measures.
  I do not mean by this term the Limestones of the Alps, which have sometimes been so named without sufficient certainty.
  On the north side of the Alps, in a part of the Carpathians, and in the Appennines of Tuscany, the Old Red Sandstone, and especially the Coal-formation, is found associated with the First Floetz Limestone; or, in other words, these two formations alternate with each other. This is very beautifully exemplified in the chain of the Kalenberg, near Vienna. In the Bavarian Rhine provinces, the Zechstein appears also to be represented by beds of Greyish-black Limestone, placed in the Coal-formation, (Obermoschel, &c.)
Your Encrinal Limestone is nothing else than a set of beds of transition-limestone, exactly similar to some of those of the Hartz and the Ardennes. These beds alternate with the undermost part of the Old Red Sandstone, which is in England, as in the Rhine Palatinate, composed in a great measure of coal-sandstones. Indeed this alternation is quite natural, and conformable to the general laws of the succession of formations; which, especially in the floetz series, alternate universally with each other at their point of contact.*
The Variegated Sandstone of the Germans (the Spessart), the Red Ground or Marl, and the Gres bizarri of the borders of the Vosges, of Homburg, &c. are one and the same deposit, which is always superior to the First Floetz Limestone. It seems to me, that it is only in this formation
  For example, the Shell Limestone (Muschelkalkstein), with the uppermost part of the variegated Sandstone, the Chalk with Plastic Clay, the Plastic Cloy with tho coarse Marine Limestone, &c.
that the great masses of Rock-salt occur, (Chester, Vier Wiliczka, Comitat of Marmorosh in Hungary, &c.); but salt springs may issue also from some parts of the Old Red Sandstone.
The Second Floetz Gypsum of the Germans is exactly the same as the Second Gypsum of France, England, and Ireland; the First Gypsum appears wanting in the two last countries.
  In Germany, and in the north-eastern and eastern parts of France, we find above the preceding formation, the Shell Limestone (Muschelkalkstein), a very distinct formation of a greyish limestone, having a pretty perfect crystalline texture (Wurtzburg), and sometimes presenting something of an oolitic appearance, (Westphalia, Buckeburg, &c.) The petrifactions which it contains are, more especially terebratulites, pectinites, ammonites, encrinites, and organic remains resembling a kind of isis. In the south-western part of Germany (near Coburg, &c.), and in the Jura chain (Basel), this Limestone becomes a kind of Magnesian Limestone, with siliceous infiltrations, and loses its petrifactions almost entirely. I do not know that there is any deposit corresponding to this in England, although I see it could only be your Lias: but all that I have observed regarding the Lias of England and the northern coast of France, induces me to consider it as the undermost part of the Jura Limestone. Yet it might be that the Shell Limestone (Muschelkalkstein) of the Continent is represented in England by some thin inferior beds of the Lias.
The Jura Limestone of France and Germany corresponds exactly with your Lias, Oolites, Forest Marl, Cornbrash, Limestone, and Clunch Clay. All these various deposits are found in those countries. The Lias abounds in the north of France; the Oolites are found on the northern border of the Hartz, near Hildesheim, and near Goslar; the Sultmerberg is composed of a very distinct Jura Limetone; the Clunch-clay is very abundant in Westphalia, and in the same part of Germany are found many beds of Marls and Limestones which belong to the Jura. Lastly, the Planerkalk of the north of Bavaria and Swabia, and of many parts of Germany, is nothing else than certain beds of the Jura Limestone, which extend distinctly from Switzerland, through Swabia and Bavaria, as far as StafFelstein and the neighbourhood of Cobourg.
The Quadersandstein of the Germans, to which some authors assign a place above the Jura Limestone, I still think occurs under it, and therefore immediately above the Variegated Sandstone.
The Green-sand, the Planerkalk of WERNER, abounds in the northern parts of France; it is found in Westphalia (from Unna as far as Soist, on the borders of the Hartz, near Goslar and Ilsenberg), near Dresden *, in Poland, and nearly all the Planerkalk of the basin of Bohemia belongs to the same formation. It never contains belemnites, seldom terebratulites, and here and there a kind of massive hornstone. In Moravia, France, and Bavaria, it contains a deposit of hydrate of iron. This deposit is everywhere identical with that of England; and near the Hartz, lies upon the Quadersandstein, and under the Coarse Chalk.
  The chalk so profusely distributed in England and France, is also pretty frequent in the north and middle of Germany, especially the inferior part or coarse chalk, which has there been often called Planerkalk. It occupies a great part of a sort of vast sinuosity, stretching from Saltzkotten, near Paderborn, to Bielefeld and Hilter; and extends behind Paderborn as far as the neighbourhood of Herrenhausen and Kreutzkrieg. There it forms, in the undermost part, a true greyish limestone, with nodules of black flint; and, in the uppermost part, it is a whitish marly limestone, with many echinites, belemnites, mytilites, &c. It just re-appears near Hanover and Luneburg, but forms, farther east, pretty extensive hillocks and plains along the Hartz, from Unter-Elbe as far as Quedlinburg. At this last place, the coarse chalk passes insensibly into the true chalk with flint, having belemnites, echinites, terebratulites, &c. in abundance.
  The Green-sand of Dresden and the neighbourhood of Meissen contains three or four species of Terebratulites, without striae, one or two with strice, echinites. pectinites, bivalves, and teeth of a squalus.
  The chalk extends also into Moravia, and forms, particularly near Tribau and Lissitz, a pretty extensive range of hills, in which petrifactions are in some places abundant, in others very scarce. Near Blansko, the last point which this deposit has reached, it contains shells resembling ammonites? or argonautes? and small bivalves; and here it covers a coarse sandstone, under which is situated, first, a siliceous rock, containing flint-nodules, echinites, and small bivalves, and, undermost,, a white sand (Quadersandstein), with rich deposits of cellular and pisiform brown ironstone (hydrate of iron). This last deposit is only found in three places,—at Olomuczan, and Kuditz, near Blansko, where it lies in hollows of transition-limestone, and at Salhanka, upon gneiss.
  To complete the enumeration of localities where chalk is found in Germany, I have still to mention the Isles of Zealand, Moen, Wollin, and Rugen, and the Lake of Ucker. In many other points of the eastern part of Prussia, it seems to be indicated, or to be but slightly covered, by the following formations, and in Poland it is very widely distributed.
Upon the chalk, the Plastic Clay, or Argile plastique, is widely distributed in Germany, especially in the northern parts. Indeed, the greatest portion of that immense track of alluvial country (improperly so called), from the Rhine to Konigsberg, belongs to it. It seems only that the coarse marine limestone and first fresh-water formation are almost entirely wanting, and that this clay and these sands are covered by the upper marine sandy deposit of Paris, to which would belong, perhaps, also the granite-blocks, &c. The same will be the case with the great arenaceous deposit of the Bavarian flat country, of the neighbourhood of Vienna, and of the bottom of the immense Hungarian basin: but in these two last localities, the coarse marine limestone is of pretty frequent occurrence.
  In the north of Germany, the plastic clay often contains petrifactions; as in the Magdeberg, near Halle; in Lusatia, &c The brown coal, which occasionally contains earthy gypsum, as at Halle, and, in other places, amber, always freshwater shells, also coleopterous and fresh-water insects, occurs in considerable abundance in the plastic clay in the north of Bohemia and Thuringia; and from the Rhine to Konigsberg, geologists have observed, especially in the basins of existing rivers, a series of these deposits; for instance, near Koln, in the valley of the Weser, in Thuringia, below the towii of Berlin, and farther to the north-east. In Slavonia, it contains great masses of sulphur; and in Hungary, and at Vienna, small pieces of realgar. The very compact sandstone which this formation sometimes contains, and which often abounds in fragments of flint, is, for example, very well marked near Zeitz, Beuchlitz, Blansko, Carlsbad, and Toplitz, where it contains the quartz-crystals which had once formed a part of the flcetz porphyries of the neighbourhood.
  All the pseudo-volcanic products of the Mittelgebirge are owing to the brown coal of this formation.
The Coarse Marine Limestone (Calcaire grassier) occurs very rarely, and in very small patches, in the north of Germany; as, for instance, near Lemgo, in Westphalia, where it contains cucullea, turritella, natica or ampullaria, nucleola, and other bivalves *. I have also seen it with the same shells near Cassel, Dransfeld, Ahlfeld, and Hildesheim.
The First Fresh-water Formation does not occur in Germany, Austria, and Hungary, yet we have seen gypsum in their plastic clays; on the other hand, the coarse Marine Limestone, or, at least, what I take for it, contains, in Austria and Hungary, remains of amphibious, and even of terrestrial animals. Regarding this interesting fact, however, I cannot say more at present.
The Upper Marine Formation abounds in Austria and Hungary, as well as in the north of Germany; but in the two first countries it is often calcareous, and is associated with much clay, and marl, containing a numerous set of petrifactions, many of which are like those described byBROCCHI in the Subappennine Hills.
The Upper Fresh-water Formation exists in the basin of Vienna, (Baden, &c.), in Hungary, and in Moravia. In Hungary, near Pest, there is a true fresh-water limestone, with planorbes and lymnei; and in Moravia, near Nicolchitz, it forms, in a valley, a small deposit, like that of CEningen; and the schistose marls contain there only some impressions of aquatic plants and of insects, (Dipteres). A kind of semi-opal also occurs there.
The north of Germany abounds in Calcareous Tuffs.
  The Nagelfluh of Switzerland belongs probably to various epochas of the Paris formation.

  II. UNSTRATIFIED ROCKS.
The Unstratified Rocks, which appeared, among the preceding, as subordinate masses, or immense local deposits, have arrested my attention during this journey; and I believe we are yet very far from knowing, either their origin, or their true geognostic position.
Granite appears to me to exist in the primitive class of rocks, in great hills or domes, and in veins; of the latter of which, some are in connection with those great bodies of granite constituting mountains; others are isolated in the gneiss or mica-slate, in the same manner as the basaltic veins or dikes are in chalk and other rocks. In the great track of primitive schistose rocks of the Scandinavian peninsula, the granite is confined to the gneiss and micaslate.
  In clay-slate rocks, the granites often occur under the form of syenite, and even of syenitic porphyry, their position being the same as that of the granites in gneiss and mica-slate. I have only to observe, that the various syenitic porphyries are pretty frequent in veins or dikes. To these granites belong some syenites in the clay-slate formation between the northern part of Transylvania and Hungaria, perhaps the syenite near Schemnitz, the granites of the Frankenwald, of the Cotentin, and probably many granites of Cornwall and Brittany.
Those granites, which are undoubtedly newer than greywacke, are almost entirely syenites, or syenitic; at least, it seems probable that these rocks are newer than the granites which we find in the clay-slate districts. One of the best examples of this class of syenites and granites is seen in those which cover so great an extent of country from Meissen to Lauban, and which are now known to repose upon greywacke, and to be covered by it, —or, if this.be denied, which are situated in greywacke. The granites of the Hartz, of the Thuringerwald, of Westmorland, of the Crift'el, the granite near Loch Ken, &c. must be arranged here.
  A peculiarity which these granitic masses have, is to be often surrounded, in part, or in whole, with peculiar anomalous rocks called Hornfels in the Hartz, and varieties of gneiss in Scotland. These last rocks are intermixed with the true greywacke, and pass into it. 
  To these crystalline rocks succeed great deposits of porphyry. These porphyries, in some countries, form a kind of series of alternating masses with the greywacke, as in Cumberland, and in the Fichtelgebirge, where the Felspathic Breccias or Tuffs are particularly very remarkable. In other countries, the porphyries seem to have appeared later, or not to have had that facility of alternating with other rocks; and hence they rise in the form of immense massive hills, as in Schemnitz, Kremnitz, and in many parts of Transylvania, of the north of Germany, and of the middle of France.
  In many countries, the porphyries occur in great masses, veins, or even in beds, in the old red sandstone (Silesia). But their appearance in the middle of the coal formation is the most interesting, because in that case we have been enabled to trace their origin. Near Halle, for instance, where such an occurrence takes place, the porphyries appear in beautiful domes, like the Puy de Sarcouy, in Auvergne, which pass through or under the coal-formation, while another portion evidently extends itself above the arenaceous deposit.
  It is also curious to observe, in the neighbourhood of these porphyries, the great disturbances of the strata, the alteration of the coal, and the great bodies of singular anomalous rocks, which, notwithstanding that they pass into sandstones, have so little of their appearance, that they receive other names, Claystone Tuff, Lydian-stone, Jasper, &c.; and indeed their varieties are so numerous, that there is no nomenclature large enough for them.
These porphyries of the red sandstone and coal formation are associated with many trap-rocks, which are distinctly pyroxenic or basaltic, although the trap-rocks which accompany the crystalline deposits in the greywacke appear sometimes to be much more difficultly recognised as such. Yet, near Prague, I have seen in transition-slate, beds or masses of well-marked dolerite, having the common igneous accidents in their upper and under part. The same appearance I had also the pleasure of observing in the valley of Triebisch, near Freyberg, in transition clay-slate.
The trap-rocks form in the Floetz Period, as in the Transition, more commonly veins, with, or without, small coulees, or a kind of beds, than hills. Theaccidents of the neighbouring rocks are various. I shall only mention here, that, at Planitz, I observed sandstone-slate, or slate-clay, much indurated under the amygdaloid, and besides the amygdaloid contained an immense quantity of pieces of the old red sandstone, so that the whole had pretty nearly the appearance of an extent of mica-slate, with granitic veins, like those of Garviemore. Besides, I have observed there, that a part of the amygdaloid was only an altered sandstone; and, for this reason, many of the amygdaloids do not give pyroxene by the analysis. How such a change can be produced, I do not know; but such is the fact, and every body may see it. I am only astonished that it has not been recorded. Indeed, I can assert, that the Erzgebirge contains many interesting facts, and distinct appearances, which might be adduced in support of the Huttonian theory. Were I not apprehensive of being considered rash, I would mention the appearance of porphyry elevating itself, with various true igneous accidents, from below, and out of the claystone and gneiss rocks. It is also ascertained, I can say, that the beds of porphyry described in the gneiss of that country, are true veins, belonging, as would appear, nearly all to the beginning of the Floetz Period; in which there yet appears, as in Zinnwald, a granite, with ores of zinc, and other minerals, which have been erroneously named the very oldest ones. That the metalliferous veins are intimately united with the appearances of these crystalline igneous rocks, 1 cannot doubt; but, as may naturally be supposed, some of the minerals contained in the veins have got there from above, or have been formed in the aqueous way. The great metalliferous deposits in veins appeared to me to form a kind of net-work. Certainly nearly all that WERNER has said about them is true; but his explanation, by filling up entirely from above, is no longer admissible. When we consider such vast bodies of rock impregnated with ores, as the auriferous transition-porphyries of Kremnitz and of Transylvania; and when we reflect that all the rich mines of Hungaria and Transylvania are in porphyry masses, excepting a single one in greywacke (Verespatak) ; and when we entertain a strong suspicion that these are igneous products, we will not long be puzzled to comprehend the phenomena. You will probably oppose to the igneous hypothesis the Mercury-mines in the coal-formation; but these also seem to have been produced in the same way, as results from observations I lately made in the Bavarian Rhine provinces. The ores are there contained in small veins in porphyry, or in rocks in contact with such products; and these coaly or arenaceous rocks are almost always indurated or altered in a thousand various ways; but I shall discuss this subject at another time.
  In the period subsequent to the Old Red Sandstone, the Basalts have protruded from below, probably at various irregular periods, even before the formation of chalk; for the cones, hills, and veins of basalts, so well known around the Meissner, Eisenach, the Rhonegebirge, and Gottingen, seem to indicate such an age. But this is a point that requires very minute investigation.
Germany possesses a great variety of basaltic deposits, most of which are analogous to those of Ireland, and to the most of those in Scotland. I say most of those in Scotland, because I am now inclined to classify the few hills around Edinburgh, Arthur's Seat, Salisbury-craigs, and such like deposits, with those of Eissenach. These are certainly in Germany the oldest, and they comprehend some conical hills and veins in different parts.
The other basalts in Germany can be divided into those which have been formed under water, like the preceding, and these which have flown in the open air. The first, like the basalts in Ireland and Scotland, posterior to the chalk formation, form conical or massive hills, a kind of platforms, or high plains very little inclined, and veins or dikes. The cones or hills are principally formed of various porphyritic clinkstones, which take, as in the Mittelgebirge and Rhongebirge, the place of the trachyte of other great deposits. The group of Mezen, in Auvergne, presents the same fact, although it was probably formed above the water. The plateaux, or nappes, present the same variety of basalt and tuffs as Ireland and Scotland, and some points in Auvergne, and also the same calcareous and zeolitic substances.
Basaltic veins are very frequent in Germany, and arc found in almost all the formations of that country, with all the accidents, as in Scotland. The Quadersandstein of the north of Bohemia, and the Shell Limestone (Muschelkalkstein) of the western part of Germany, present beautiful examples of these appearances.
The second less numerous class of igneous rocks which appear to have flown in the open air, occur not only in hills with craters, and with scoriae, but also in currents. In the south of Germany, in Hungary, and Transylvania, this class is exceedingly well exemplified; for there the trachytes form great and high districts, more or less surrounded by or associated with basalts; for example, near Feldbach, in Styria. In Hungary and Transylvania, they are accompanied also with vitreous rocks, pumice, and great masses of re-agglutinated trachytic, or pumice-rocks, which show, by sometimes containing shells of the Parisian formation, the recent age of these deposits. Such is particularly the nature of these formations in Hungary, where they rest at Chemnitz and Cremnitz upon the transition metalliferous porphyries, and form, as it were, four or five great islands in the middle of that immense basin.
  In the other parts of Germany there exist no trachytes, but v only basaltic lavas, with scoria; and craters, or indications of them. Thus there is a very beautiful crater near the Pferde Kopf, in the Rhongebirge; distinct lava-streams are observed in the Vogelsgebirge; at Eger, there are true volcanic scoriae, and indications of a crater; near Hof, upon the borders of Moravia and Silesia, the Raudenberg is a great heap of red scoriae, like the Puy de Graveneire, in Auvergne, or in Vivarais; and there is a portion of a crater and small streams of basaltic lava; lastly, even in the Riesengebirge, there is a crater and streams of lava.
  I shall now conclude this long letter, by enumerating the characters which appear to me most distinctive of the two kinds of igneous rocks, those formed under, and those formed above the water. 
  1. The igneous rocks formed under water, at least those posterior to the chalk formation, do not rise into hills of so great a height as those formed above the surface; and, in general, the first class of rocks must have certainly, in all periods, had more difficulty in attaining the same height as the second. .
  2. The first class produce veins or dikes more easily, and in greater number, than the second.
  3. When the first class of rokcs form a kind of coulee or stream, these streams seem generally not to unite the length and the small breadth of the streams (coulees) above the water.
  4. The rocks of the first class are generally more compact than those of the second.
  5 The basalts of the first class are often intimately united with basaltic tuffs, and the porphyries with some kinds of felspathic breccia; an appearance which is almost entirely unknown in the basalts produced above the surface of the water, because in them the small pieces which form the tuffs had been ejected by the volcanoes under the form of rapilli.
  6. Rocks with the vitreous character abound much more in the igneous rocks formed above water, than in those formed under it.
  7. The igneous rocks formed under water, contain many substances, produced by infiltration, unknown in the other class of rocks, and more frequently also substances produced by sublimation.
  8. The basalts formed under water show imbedded, very often, pieces of the neighbouring rock, which are more or less indurated or altered. Beautiful examples of this I observed in the basaltic cone of Dosenberg, near Warburg, where the rock is full of pieces of the Shell Limestone (Muschelkalkstein); and in the small clinkstone-cone near Banow, upon the borders of Hungary and Moravia, the rock contains great and small masses of clay and sandstone, so much indurated and altered, that they are like the rock of Portrush in Ireland.
  9. The neighbouring rocks are rarely altered near the lavas: on the other hand, near the basalts formed under water, these same rocks are very often subjected to various indurations, alterations, and penetrations of igneous gaseous matters.


