
THERE are three kinds of passports in use in Turkey, the teskere, a simple passport; the bigranti, of a somewhat higher class; and the firman, which is obtained through the traveller's ambassador from the Sultan, and is called great firman. The firman gives the right to have a Tartar as travelling companion and protector. These Tartars are employed to carry the letters and orders, &c. of the government; they have a particular dress, consisting of a dark, violet-coloured short coat, a kind of short petticoat open before, blue Turkish trousers, large boots, partly covered on the upper part with ornamented woollen stockings, and the red high Turkish cap. They form a particular corporation, which is much respected, and they are all inscribed in a book, and distributed over the whole empire, at the residence of every pacha. There they live in a house set apart for themselves, called Tartar-han. As they are thoroughly acquainted with European Turkey, they find friends wherever they go; and their being armed with pistols, and a long hanger, always insures them respect, so that the traveller may rely on them with confidence.
They are in general a good sort of people; and though drinking a good deal of brandy, are always sober when on the road, and only intemperate when arrived at the end of their journey, or when they have plenty of money, and are in a large town.
Their pay is pretty high, being 10 francs a-day; besides which, the traveller has to pay for their return, and for posthorses, at the rate of 1 piastre, or 5 French sous for every hour; but as a post-boy, called surudju, is required for bringing back the horses, the traveller has in reality to pay for two horses; a third is taken gratis, in case one should die on the road. The Tartar, when on duty, is always galloping, with his whip in his hand, ready to strike the horse of the surudju, or that person himself if lazy.
  As the Tartars are sober, and live chiefly on onions, garlic, eggs, fowls, lamb, and milk, nobody, I think, before the inexperienced Quin was foolish enough to conclude a bargain with one for travelling, and the eating on the road. What would a naturalist do with a Tartar, always galloping, and travelling at night. If you make a proper bargain, then, the Tartar is like one of your own servants, and does what you wish, although he never mixes with the servants, and dines alone, to shew that he is greater than they. His title is Tartara, a diminutive of Tartaraga, or Mr Tartar. In several pachaliks they may be hired at a lower rate, even for four or five francs a-day, especially when they are old, or out of service.
The great firman has another advantage, in giving the right to be put into private lodgings by the Turkish commanders in villages, as well as in towns. Now in Turkey there exist a great number of isolated inns, called han, or when in small villages meyhane. In such inns the traveller generally finds every possible comfort, if he can adapt himself to oriental custom, and is travelling during summer. They have large open galleries, which may be used as drawing-room and sleepingroom, and sometimes apartments clean enough to please even a European, together with the necessary provisions. In the towns and large villages, the inns are often crowded with people; they have no court-yard or garden, and even, sometimes, no large gallery; so that the traveller is obliged to eat and sleep in the same room with others; and it is, therefore, of great consequence to get a private lodging. The traveller, on arriving, either goes at once to the pacha or Turkishu commander, or sends his Tartar to him, and is immediately lodged in a house, which generally belongs to a Christian. The Christians are so much accustomed to this regulation, that many have a part of their residence allotted expressly for foreigners, to prevent them seeing their families or wives. There, the traveller orders what he likes, and pays, as at an inn, or if the people are rich, gives the women a present of some pieces of money. Also if he calls on the pacha as a mark of civility, the latter will perhaps have the politeness to send him a dinner from his own kitchen, or hay for the horses, or defray the expense of the post-horses. At all events, he will order one of his inferior officers to conduct the foreigner wherever he chooses, and to watch over his safety. In a very short time the whole city becomes aware that the stranger is a friend of the pacha, and, far from annoying him, all treat him with every possible respect. In getting a private lodging, one should take care that the house be inhabited; for sometimes rich Christians, who dislike such visits, go away from their houses, and leave the traveller without any assistance for making the necessary arrangements for dinner or supper. When this happens, a second call on the pacha, or his kiaya or alterego, or sometimes even a civil word to the officer in attendance, will be sufficient to attain the object.
Lastly, as the great firman specifies the object of the traveller, which is not the case with the teskere, it inspires the Turks with perfect confidence. The foreigner goes to the pacha, Musselim or Ayan commanding in the city, takes with him his tartar, and presents his firman to the pacha, who receives it with respect, or even kisses it, and reads it over in a low tone of voice, after which comes the coffee, and the tschibuk or pipe; and then is the time for the traveller to ask the pacha for what he wants to forward his journey; horses, guards, hay, barley, or information about the road. Physical instruments, the collecting of plants and minerals, and even drawing, are things which are quite new to the Turks, as well as to the Christian Turks, so that it is necessary to shew in the firman to the people, the strongest proofs that one does nothing contrary to the laws of the Sultan. We should also take care to hide nothing from the people. Every experiment or piece of business must be done openly, and one must always be ready to answer questions. The plants and minerals should be for medical purposes, and for discovering mines, the physical instruments for determining the nature of the climate and the like. No drawing should be made of a Turk when in presence of the foreigner, without his express permission. The secluding oneV self in a room or endeavouring to lock it up, only tends to excite suspicion. In Turkey, the traveller must not pay any attention to people who come into his room from curiosity; the less he attends to them the sooner they will go away. Besides, it is not the fashion to lock up doors as in Europe, and nobody would dare to take the least thing belonging to a traveller, especially to one with a Tartar. Excepting in the great maritime towns and the Greek towns, small robberies are unknown in Turkey. When the Turks do rob, it is with arms in their hand, on the highway; indeed, it cannot be otherwise in a country, where the doors do not shut, and the windows are of paper, with wooden frame?. Even the shops are locked in a very miserable manner, and the shopkeeper often goes away, leaving nobody to watch his goods, as the peasant leaves his house with the door open. Bankers have their money in trunks, which are not fastened to the floors or walls, and in wooden houses which could be very easily broken into. The only things which are apt to bring the traveller into scrapes, are, disliking to answer questions, treating people, especially Turks, with contempt or haughtiness, exciting their jealousy, or giving vent to angry feelings. The Turk talks little; it is difficult to make him angry ; but when he is so, he is very passionate.
  In Turkey many roads are impracticable for carriages; and only a few are good enough for European carriages ; it is therefore the custom to travel on horseback, the ladies occasionally travelling alone in bad waggons. The trunks of the traveller are put on a second horse, furnished with a semer,or pack saddle, made of wood, with knobs to which ropes are attached. I found short leather trunks the most convenient; and ropes with iron hooks at the fends would probably render the packing more expeditious. The chief difficulty is to distribute the luggage^ so that there may be an equal weight on each side of the saddle. Where this cannot be done, the people sometimes use stones as a counterpoise ; but this contrivance is apt to spoil the trunks. The price of horses in Turkey is from 80 to 100 or 125 francs; for which last sum a good riding horse may be bought. Their keep costs per day from 10 to 13 sous, and in large towns from 15 to 16 sous.
The horses are fed chiefly on barley; and the pack horses retain their pack-saddle night and day. The horses often lie out in the open air. It is necessary to have for each a woollen cloth, and a bag made of horse-hair, from which they may eat their barley, It is also necessary to have a servant for each pack-horse, or at least two servants for three horses, especially at the beginning of a journey, as otherwise, the horses not being accustomed to each other, the caravan is apt"to get into disorder. Servants are not expensive in Turkey, and for that reason every traveller has some. The Servish, or Turkish servants are probably the best, but the traveller must always remember that those people are not accustomed to such activity as our servants. They live far worse, but work less. Thm usual monthly wages of a servant are 25,80, or 40 francs; if he has his own horse he is paid 40 or 50 francs; if not, the traveller must get a horse for him, or hire post-horses.
The first plan is preferable, as horses are always easily sold for at least half-price; and, in coming from the north, they will sell in the south for their original price. A servant's living may be estimated at less than one franc a-day. It is essential that one of the servants should know something of cookery; and also all, or nearly all, should speak the Turkish, Servian, or Bulgarian languages. In visiting Greece, a Greek servant becomes necessary. If a number of se»rants are taken, I would recommend a German or Hungarian one, as, knowing the mode of living of European gentlemen, he would be useful in directing the others. Old German soldiers, accustomed to a hard life, would also be found of service, but fashionable servants should never be taken. If the traveller does not understand oriental languages he must have an interpreter, or, at least, use one of his servants as such. Such men are easily to be found at Constantinople, Bucharest, Belgrade, Salonichi, &c.
  In regard to the money to be taken,— Austrian money, even the paper-money, will do for the whole of Servia; but in Turkey one loses on the Austrian money, and it is therefore necessary to take golden tkosars of the value of five francs, or the large Turkish talaris, which is only half that value, or five piastres. I need scarcely recommend prudence as regards carrying too much money, or shewing it openly. The best plan is to have circular letters of credit on all the chief mercantile towns; and these should be written, not only in an European language, but also in Greek and Servian.
The traveller must have as little luggage as possible. The first thing requisjfe is a bed, consisting simply of a strong and thick carpet, or a Hungarianbunda (furred robe), or, what is still better, a small mattress made of horse-hair, with a small pillow and a woollen cover; the whole capable of being rolled up and put into a linen bag, after having been bound with leather strings. To these may also be added two bed-sheets, or two sheets fitted together like a sack. In winter time the furred robe may be advantageous, but in summer insects are apt to take up their abode in it. Straw, and particularly hay, are found in most placets, so that, with that addition, one sleeps very comfortably on such a bed as I have described; and, if the weather is cold, the traveller may add his horse's woollen cloth. A small iron bed-stead appears to me to be quite useless. As Turkish etiquette requires but little attention as to dress, a traveller should take care not to overload himself with clothing. The riding-coat is the common dress for every purpose; and the dreas-coat is scarcely necessary, unless in the maritime large towns. I would also recommend warm, as well as light, trousers and vests, and a warm riding-coat, because the temperature is variable in the. hilly parts, and the medium temperature is often not so high as one would expect in such latitudes. The north-east wind is very cold, and marks well its origin. J. found, in summer, a light short jacket a most comfortable dress on horseback; and it is also much used in cities during the plague. The best defence against rain is a larger waterproof cloak, or, if one prefers it, one of the heavy, thick, woollen cloths which are used by the Turks. The green pale colour, which is peculiar to the Turkish priests, is to be avoided, either in dress, or for umbrellas. If one wishes always to have clean shoes, it is necessary to carry shoe-blacking, as it is still unknown in most places. Duplicates should be taken of all kinds of physical instruments, spectacles, pencils, colours, &c., as few of these can be replaced or repaired in Turkey. In all Macedonia I could not even find spirit-of-wine for my hygrometer. It is convenient to carry a small tin pot for making coffee or tea, an iron kettle for making soup and boiling meat, a small iron frying-pan, a large spoon, a pocket apparatus, with spoon, knife, and fork, and a pocket leather-cup; for although all such things, excepting the knife and fork, are generally to be found in the Turkish inns, they are sometimes awanting, or other people may already have used them; besides which, one is thus enabled to cook in a more cleanly manner. A fire apparatus, with some wax candles and a candlestick, is also useful; for people often use, instead of candles, resinous wood, or even kindled hay, which gives very little light.
Europeans may find it easy to dispense with chairs, and to employ instead of them their bed, a stone, a square piece of Wallachian salt, or low Turkish stools; but this is not the case in regard to a table when one is obliged to write. I should therefore recommend the traveller to take along with him a small portable iron table, consisting of five iron rods, four being fitted together, two by two, in the manner of an inclined cross, and the fifth serving to attach together both the crosses. Such an apparatus is easily fitted to every Turkish round table or sofra, which is never more than four or five inches high. Some towels are also necessary, as well as a small provision of tea, coffee, rice, sugar, raisins, and the like. In this way the traveller can find something to eat everywhere, and he can establish his bivouac wherever he likes. It is a good precaution always to secure before departing the meat necessary for the next dinner or supper, such as fowls, lamb, &c. then, by sending it on with one of the servants, or the Tartar, to the inn, so that he may reach it an hour or two before the rest of the party, they enjoy the pleasure of finding their dinner ready, and are not obliged to wait till the meat is sought for and cooked.
The Turks eat at eleven in the morning, and at six or seven in the evening. The common meats are, all kinds of poultry, lamb, either roasted or cooked as a ragout, or made into a soup with rice; sometimes it is roasted whole, with rice, hashed meat, or liver, and red Spanish pepper in its inside; thepillaze, or rice with butter, fat, or milk; a kind of cake or tart of herbs and eggs called pita, salad, raisins, grapes, excellent acidulous milk or jaghur,&c. Good milk is found nearly everywhere; but as the Turks take coffee without milk, you must always order, the previous evening, the milk for the next morning's breakfast, as otherwise it would be made into cheese orjaghur. There are still various haches or ragouts prepared with butter, jaghur, or Spanish pepper, haches of the leaves of plants, the sarma, and many sweet dishes, such as eggs and milk mixed together, [and fried; the halva, a kind of glutinous food with honey, stewed fruits, good comfits, and various fruits, amongst which the melons, water melons, and grapes, are the only ones which are better than in other parts of Europe. They have some vegetables which are unknown in Germany and France. It is easier to live well with the Turks than with the Christians, for those of the Greek religion often have fast-days, or even weeks; however, Europeans should not care about this strictness, but, even in convents, should, like the Turks, order meat, and other necessary things, especially as they do not know how to cook; salt or fresh fish properly. Excellent red wine, not at all sour, like Quin's pretended Hungarian wine, is found everywhere.
  The best months to travel in Turkey are from April to October; for, in winter, the roads are bad in many places, and sleeping in rooms with paper windows is unpleasant. In the Archipelago it may perhaps be different. As for the plague, it is less prevalent in winter and in spring than in autumn; it seems to be always at Constantinople, although not at the neighbouring towns where Christians live. In Macedonia, it is said to happen rarely, only once in twenty-five years, as is alleged. This year it was there, and in various towns. The Turks are still ignorant of the proper means to extirpate this disease, which, like the cholera, attacks chiefly the lower class of people, those who are dirty or intemperate. We saw two towns, Koprili and Tenishe-Vardar, surrounded, by order of the Sultan, with a military cordon, so that nobody could either go in or out; rather a singular way of preserving the lives of those who had not yet been attacked by the disease. The consequence was, that in other towns, the people" took great care that the governor should not know of any of the cases of plague which occurred in them. The plague was at Dubnicza in August, owing (o the clothes of a Tartar, who had died there, being sold to the Jews. Yet travellers must not fear this disease; it is customary to go round about and avoid infected places; and the cholera is worse, from being liable to attack one anywhere. It is therefore advisable to carry proper medicines for these and other violent diseases. In Turkey one finds very few medical men; the pachas have generally some Jew or Turk, who is rather a charlatan than ahekim or doctor] Indeed, there is no opening for a physician in Turkey, as the sick call them in only for old chronic diseases, whilst for dan
gerous maladies they only take the advice of women or quacks, and too often die without any advice at all. Surgeons are still rarely to be met with; even in Servia there is a great want of medical men, and the government have ordered many kreis doctors (physicians for a district of country), and surgeons, but the individuals are still awanting to fill these offices. In Turkey good physicians are only to be found in the chief cities, Smyrna, Salonichi, Bucharest, Constantinople, Belgrade. A medical school in Turkey, as well as in Servia, would be a most useful institution. At present the army physicians in Turkey are chiefly European gentlemen. Sending Turks or Servians to European schools will never be of the same benefit as medical schools in those countries themselves.
The European, on arriving in a town where European consuls are residing, should put himself under the protection of the consul of his own nation; so that, if he remains for some time, he may be exempted from tribute. The post is still in a very imperfect state throughout Turkey, and the Vienna post is the only regular communication between Germany and Turkey, so that the consuls' houses are the places where the traveller will be likely to find news from home.
Lastly, I may speak of the robbers who are said to infest Turkey. I do not know how it was formerly, but now there are almost none, or, where there are suspected to be any, stations of soldiers or gendarmes are placed, although these, perhaps, should sometimes be stronger. The only parts where one is likely to be robbed at present in Turkey, are, the north-west part of Bosnia, where the new regulations of the Sultan, the new military dress, &c. find many enemies; also the limits of Thessaly and Greece, where Grecian robbers are said to infest both sides. But even in these last countries, as in the Olympus, it is possible'jto travel with a good escort, and the advice of wellinclined pachas. In other parts of Turkey where I was told there were robbers, as in Albania, I suspect they were only men exasperated by bad treatment, and not able to get justice, or governed contrary to their customs, who revenged themselves by killing the soldiers of the pacha, although they did not, on that account, attack peaceable travellers.
  In some parts of Albania, where the pacha's officers said that the pacha's authority was very little respected, I heard the people say that theGhiaurs or Christians had now the power, and that it was necessary to submit to them. Servia, through the admirable strictness of Prince Milosch, has been rendered as secure as any civilized country; and one may travel day and night through the vast forests of that country, without any danger. I must add that Turkey is far from being, like Spain, favourable to robbers; for if in Spain one finds many towns or large villages, and few isolated farm-houses, the contrary is the case in Turkey. Besides, the slave population in Servia and Bulgaria, are a good race, and well disposed to European travellers. The Turks also, are the same, although less communicative. The Albanese are wilder, but yet not at all a bad people, especially when one knows their language. The Greeks, however, are cunning, and often employ their cunning for bad purposes.
  By following my advice, and taking proper precautions, one may be assured of making a pleasant and comfortable journey in Turkey, without the least danger, at the rate of twelve francs a-day; but if one hurries into that country in the same foolish manner as Quin, without servants or interpreter, and ignorant of the language; if he will not live like the Turks, but ask for tables, beds, potatoes (which are scarcely known in Turkey), and veal (which is not used there) ; if he feel himself only happy in London and Paris, he will bring from Turkey very singular fancies, like our friend Quin,* and it would be better that he had remained at home with his tea and toasted bread. I should be happy if these lines should induce some Englishmen or naturalists to follow my steps, and assist me to throw, at last, some light upon the topography and natural history of that beautiful empire, European and Asiatic Turkey, to the investigation of which I have devoted the remaining best days of my life.
   I was much amused with the political views of Quin on the regeneration of the Turks, and his idea that the Roman Catholic religion would soon prevail in Turkey, and the like. But his fancy of a canal being cut from Panchova to Cladova, through the hills of Servia, to avoid the rapids of the Danube, reminds me of the Frenchman who was travelling in Switzerland, and who, being annoyed by the number of mountains, asked why the Swiss did not entirely level their hills! His fear of walking alone near Moldawa, because the dress of the Wallachians was unknown to him, is a sure proof of his ignorance; for that country is as safe as the neighbourhood of London, or more so, and even the umbrella was not necessary, Qum's work owes its success to the novelty of the voyage, and some good descriptions of the customs and dress of the Turkish people.

