  IN Brochant's excellent French translation of De la Beetle's Geological Manual, M. de Beaumont has given a new and modified exposition of his theory and opinions, in regard to his twelve or thirteen epochs of elevations or revolutions. His essay may be considered as consisting of two parts, viz. an explanation of the theory, and an account of the application of his system.
  It is only to Mr Lyell that M. de Beaumont seems to stand opposed in the first part of his essay. Every one knows and acknowledges that most of the upheavings (redressemens) were produced by a series of violent and rapid movements; and this view is rendered more probable by the extent of the effects of elevation. In treatises and lectures on Geology, the Pyrenees, the primary chains of Scotland, and some chains of Scandinavia, have sometimes been brought forward as examples of this kind; and M. de Beaumont acknowledges this very fairly (p. 167). On the other hand, Mr Lyellhas shewn very well the vagueness of the limits assigned by M. de Beaumont to his revolutions. (See Principles of Geology, vol. iii. p. 343.) I believe that few geologists would blame M. de Beaumont for rejecting Mr Lyell's hypothesis, by which he endeavours to explain the upheavings, by the unlimited repetition of local and slow movements; although this view may be correct in the case of the elevation of whole continents.
  It must always be difficult to trace limits between a very quick and a very slow movement; as, for example, when one speaks of an elevation which has taken place rapidly, does he mean an instantaneous upheaving? or are we to understand an effect produced in a space of some months, or some years, or even some centuries? An upturning of strata may have taken a considerable time for its completion; and even such a period as to have admitted of the deposition of strata on a part of the earth different from that where the elevating force was in action. In this way the geological demonstrations of the great rcvolutions produced by elevation, would not be everywhere present, a position which is just what M. de Beaumont admits.
  It is probably to Mr Lyell that M. de Beaumont alludes. Unfortunately M. de Beaumont has not always attended enough to the mean directions (directions moyennes) of the various mountain ranges; and, on the other hand, leaving these natural guides to the labyrinth of dislocations, he has recourse to the indications afforded by maps, which are very often erroneous. He has committed this error in regard to the Apennine chain. 
The study of all the possible intersections of M. de Beaumont's twelve or thirteen systems of elevation, would be most useful in order to get a standard point of departure; and to see if, in the known parts of the earth, there are no similar accidens which do not belong to any of the cases established a priori, and which would render necessary the establishment of some additional epoch of revolution.
According to M. de Beaumont, a parallelism of direction in the dislocations of various countries had been long remarked. Amongst the older writers, I shall rest satisfied with mentioning Stenon, who wrote in 1667 (De Solido, &c), and Bernhard Varenius, who, in 1712, published his Geographia Generalis in qua affectiones generales Telluris explicantur. Werner, and after him Schmidt, applied the idea to the distinction of metalliferous veins; Humboldt did so to various chains of Europe; Jameson to the mountain ranges of Scotland; Hausmann, in 1808, to the mountains of Scandinavia; M. Brochant to the Jura range, and also to the Alps; Heim to the hills of central Germany, and Von Buch, in 1824, to the chains of central Europe. 
  A well marked distinction must be made between those who reject totally the foundations of M. de Beaumont's doctrine, and those who admit them, but at the same time do not think it possible to push the consequences so far as he does. Asa supporter of the latter view of the subject, I am fully aware of all the importance of the parallelism in the directions of mountain chains, as well as of longitudinal and transverse valleys, when I have limited countries under examination. These phenomena afford important indications, when the geognostical positions have furnished the key to the upheaving and upturning of the strata. But I confess that in the yet infant state of the science, I dislike travelling round the globe between the parallel lines of the same elevation, without taking into consideration the incorrectness of maps, and our complete ignorance about the stratification and the nature of the strata in most chains of the earth. M. de Beaumont may be right in his assumptions, but in this state of uncertainty I prefer abstaining entirely from such speculative subjects. For my part I cannot admit this definition, because I take into consideration the sinkings as well as the upheavings and upturnings; and, besides, I do not exactly understand the force of the expression, "k peu pres." The upraisings in a country are indicated by the altered positions of the various series of beds, and by the different directions of these changed positions. Every upraising produced, either separately or simultaneously, elevations, upturnings of the strata, depressions, and rents; thus the dislocations of a country will be marked by different accidens;first, by the variety of forms presented by chains of hills, and by peculiarities in the position of the mineral masses on their declivities; secondly, by the upturning of beds even on level plains, and at the level of the sea; and, thirdly, by the occurrence of depressions of the soil, rents, faults, veins, dykes, open rents, and valleys. Ordinarily all these accidens of upraising and disturbing power can be classified into a certain number of groups according to their directions. This is a longer definition than that of M. de Beaumont, and it is even not so well limited, but I think it is more conformable to the phenomena presented in nature, which, indeed, are of such a description as to baffle very strict classification.
  I agree with Mr Lyell that we should come to some agreement as to the meaning of the words formation and dislocation. If the first term were extended so far as that we should consider as formations the gypsum of Montmartre and the coarse marine limestone of Paris, we should not be able to understand one another; but yet I suppose M. de Beaumont is of this opinion. 
  In regard to the word dislocation, it is synonymous with se,paration and disjointing; and, taking this general designation, it appears to me that the dislocations of the ground are not nearly numerous enough to correspond with the directions of the chains. But I enter into the abstractive idea of M. de Beaumont, who, in this way, has only indicated those great phenomena which have raised up ranges of hills, while he has omitted the minor changes which have taken place. I believe that, in the present state of our knowledge, the twelve revolutions, or systems of elevation, are too few even for Europe, small as it is, in proportion to the whole surface of the globe.
  M. de Beaumont acknowledges that the number of systems of elevation is by no means fixed for ever, (p. 123); and especially in so far as the older formations are concerned. Indeed if we include the whole surface of the globe, there seems to be nothing against there being double or three times the number. Yet there must be a limit to the greatest upraisings which have agitated the crust of the earth, and M. de Beaumont has expressed himself well on this subject (p. 661): it is only in regard to the number of elevations that we differ, and I confess I have less faith in the present state of our knowledge. To those philosophers who, on the other hand, suppose an unlimited number of epochs of elevation, we would, with M. de Beaumont, oppose the logical deduction of Saussure and M. Brochant. Now, as these groups of deposits are limited in number, in proportion to the small surface of our planet, the opinion of an unlimited number of very great elevations would seem to be excluded.
  M. de Beaumont believes that, in his system, he has given more than des apercus generaux et vagues, in regard to the mutual relations of elevations and geological formations (p. 621); but I believe with my excellent friend Mr Lyell, that he exaggerates the results of his views; for, speaking only of Europe, he considers merely the chains of mountains, and what he calls boutonnieres. He has not yet ventured to trace, upon a map of Europe, his twelve systems of elevations, although the facts for such a generalization are not wanting. But, as such a map is more striking than long descriptions, errors are more easily perceived even by those who are not initiated in all the details of geological geography, and in such a case retractations are more painful.
  In order to have given something more than limited views, M. de Beaumont should have added to his ideas on the formations of mountain chains, and their directions, some considerations on the formation of table-lands and plains or flat countries, and also a greater number of geological and geogenical expositions) similar to those I offered on the nature and origin of the European formations. By followingthis plan, his essay would have been complete, while, as it is,it cannot be considered as more than "des apercus generaux et vaguesfor the respective geographical limits of his systems are not all traced ; whereas, according to my way of considering and describing the geogeny of the crust of the earth, that of taking formation after formation, every tolerably accurate map gives a very fair idea of the changes which Europe has undergone at different times.
Some will say that I put too much weight on details; and I certainly do consider details as of great consequence, as it is in this way that it is most easy to point out an error, which might otherwise escape in the midst of generalizations. When M. de Beaumont shall have classed the whole of the European ranges and chains of mountains and the rest of that continent under his twelve lines of elevations, then every one will recognise with ease the truths as well as the errors of his doctrine. To give a striking instance of this, it is only necessary to recall to mind the line drawn by M. de Beaumont from north to south, on Corsica, Sardinia, and Istria; and for what reason ? probably because their pointed extremities are turned to the south, as those of almost all continents and large islands are; for the direction of the strata is quite different, and indeed nearly the reverse. Now, every person who had traced upon a map the direction of the stratification of the mineral masses of these countries, would distinguish at once the important error committed by the ardent imagination of the professor. In this way, I am naturally induced to mention, as the greatest imperfection of his theory, the not taking sufficiently into consideration the general direction or strike of the beds. This omission, and the horoscopical interpretations of imperfect maps, are the chief objections I have to the application of the theory. 
  The formulary of M. de Beaumont's system was and still is "l'independance des systemes de montagnes diversement dirigees; that means that every system of elevation has taken a different direction, sui generis. Starting from that proposition, which I believe is only correct within certain limits, he tells us of parallel lines of hills from the Cape Ortegal to the Persian Gulf, from Tenessee in the United States to Cape Comorin in India. From this he considers himself entitled to conclude, what is in fact merely hypothetical, that (…). In repeating last year my objections to these propositions of M. de Beaumont, I concluded from the facts we posses, that one could not admit the general coincidence between the directions of the bedsand the chains, the constant parallelism of the dislocations of the same epoch, and of contemporaneous chains, and the constant non-parallelism of chains and upraised strata of different epochs. 
M.de Beaumont still continues to explain the foundations of his theory as formerly, and one would think either that he must be correct, or that he kindly endeavoured to spare disgrace to me and others who think as I do. In a case of this kind, the interests of science should get beyond such trifling considerations. But it strikes one with astonishment to find that his views, when unfolded to us, do not at all correspond with his programme.
First, he thought it necessary to warn us, that, owing to the spherical form of the earth, the lines of elevation must have described sections of circles, and that they exist upon the tangents of these last. In regard to small sections of circles, this information was hardly necessary, but for those which are considerable, as, for instance, that of the Apennines, the Carpathians, and some chains of Asia, it is essential that M. de Beaumont should explain himself clearly, and discuss the objections made to his opinions; a course which he has not followed.
  Afterwards, when comparing his sections of circles with the lines of the meridian, he contends, in regard to the one, that he has in view only small sections of great circles, (p. 633) ; and as to the other, that he is not able to see the "limite £t la distance a laquelle il serait possible de suivre desaccidens de soulevement constamment soumis & une meme loi," (p. 622.) Now M. de Beaumont himself says, "deux grands cercles se coupant necessairement en deux points diametralement opposes ne peuvent jamais etre paralleles dans le sens ordinaire de ce mot." (p. 622.) But I leave this discussion, fearing lest it should be considered as belonging to the chicanery of words; and I now come to the facts and assertions by which it appears that M. de Beaumont reconciles his doctrine deduced from the parallelism of direction. I rest satisfied with transcribing the following four citations. In explaining his system of the Pyrenees, the ninth revolution, the following decisive paragraph occurs: Speaking of his tenth system that of the isles of Corsica and Sardinia (…). I think that this is clear enough ; but he adds farther, in considering the objections made to him on the same subject by Mr Conybeare Now I ask any one, if, with these true propositions, one can still talk of the " Independance des systemes de montagnes diversement dirigees?" Does it not confirm those who had seen only a misconception in that abstraction? This important part of M. de Beaumont's system is thus completely modified; and we must take the retractation in the details, although in the generalization the contrary view is given.
Besides this, M. de Beaumont has not taken the trouble to answer the objections made to his opinions by various geologists; as, for example, in regard to the possible formation, by elevation, of much curved or contorted chains; the difficulties presented by chains of hills composed of horizontal beds, or beds elevated together, without being upturned, as in the German Jura in Wurtemberg and Bavaria, a chain which presents also to M. de Beaumont the difficulty of describing a curve from Schaffhausen to Ratisbon, and thence to Cobourg; the difficulties presented by cavities filled by upraised masses; and, lastly, the occurrence of chains in which the strike of the bed is not parallel to the direction of the mountains, as, for instance, in the Thuringerwald, where Heim described the fact in 1798. To all these objections M. de Beaumont answers nothing, and he does the same in regard to those made by Thurmann. With regard to the cataclysms and destruction of creations produced by the elevation of the chains, that idea was mentioned by many old writers, of whom I need only allude to Fuchsel. Mr Sedgwick was the first to object that some philosophers had wished to separate in too decided a manner by revolutions, creations which would seem to be connected with the other great relations.
  M. de Beaumont only answers to Mr Sedgwick, that (…). Now, this uncertainty in the classification remains to us not as a consequence of a want of exactness in the system, but as a consequence of the gradual operations of nature. Besides, the whole reasoning of M. de Beaumont reposes upon the acceptation given to the word formation. Does it mean a deposit, a mass of various deposits, or a group of particular beings? I suppose M. de Beaumont adopts the second definition, but in that case, descending without fear from the generalizations to examples, we shall easily demonstrate that, for instance, some people have too hastily separated by general revolutions the zechstein and the coal formation; and again, the variegated sandstone, the muschelkalk, and keuper, three deposits, which, on a large scale, form only a single geological mass.  M. de Beaumont, foreseeing the objections, agrees entirely with our views, for he acknowledges that (…) Every one will admit this kind of anodyne revolution is widely different from those general cataclysms which were said to have produced such a change on the surface of the earth, that new creations were necessary to fill up again the spaces of the earth and seas, which were without beings to inhabit them. The door remains in this way open to every future correction, or to any addition to the actual system of the paleontological distribution into epochs.
Let us now review the twelve systems of elevation of M. de Beaumont.
The oldest system of elevation is that of Westmoreland and the Hundsruck, and consists of what I consider to have been islands, which had emerged before the formation of the carboniferous and Dudley series of rocks. In that system, the strata have been elevated in a line running a little to the E. of N. E., or a little to the W. of S. W., or h. 3 to 4 of the miner's compass. It includes the older chains of the British isles; those of the N. W. of Germany; the Erzgehirge; the Sudetes; a portion of the Black Forest, of the Vosges, of Mount Pilas, and of Brittany; the Montagne Noire in Southern France; the Mount Bigarre, and Mount Canigau in the Pyrenees; also a part of the centre of France, of the Maures, of Corsica, of Scandinavia (Westmanland, Jemtland, Lappmark), and of Finland. Gneiss, mica-slate, clay-slate, quartz-rock, and greywacke, constitute these chains or first continents. 
The elevation of these mineral masses must certainly have taken place before the formation of the old red sandstone, and I believe with M. de Beaumont, that it was anterior even to the formation of the newer transition rocks. The horizontal or gently inclined position of the limestone containing orthoceratites and trilobites in Sweden, in Baltic Russia, and Podolia, are much in favour of that idea. The beds with trilobites at Dudley and Tortwork, would also have been horizontal had they not been affected by more recent dislocations. The same might be said of the arenaceous and calcareous slates containing anthracite of Southern Iceland. I may add, that, in regard to Canada, excepting the information we have as to directions, the only data we have to go upon in determining the age of the first elevations of the older rocks of that country, are derived from some horizontal or slightly inclined masses of shelly limestone. The horizontality of the system in Northern Europe and in America, forms the type of a peculiar geological zone. Before going further, it is as well to remark, that there are in Europe other elevations which have taken place in lines parallel to those which we have already mentioned, and which, as we shall see, are of a different age. On the other hand, there are in Europe upheavings in completely different directions from that of which I have spoken, and which must nevertheless have been produced at the same period as the system which we are now considering. As an illustration of this remark, I mayinstance the primary schistose rocks of the Riesengebirge and the Eulengebirge, where the direction of the strata is N.N. E. to S.S. W., or N.N. W. to S.S. E., and sometimes W. N. W. to E. S. E. Another example is the primarypart of the Bohmer-Wald-Gebirge, where the direction is most generally E. N. E. to W. S. W. It was thus that the Continent was produced, which was afterwards covered with the insular vegetation whose remains are now buried in the coaly beds of Silesia and Bohemia. This, then, would be an example of a variety of directions in the same system of elevation, and it will be perceived, that, with my mode of reasoning, one can go farther, and with more certainty, than when guided only by the doctrine of directions of chains, and the parallelism of elevations.
  If M. de Beaumont is skilful enough to decompose all these various directions into as many systems, it remains for him still to prove the chief point, viz. that all the upheavings besides that from a little to the E. of N.E., to a little to the W. of S.W., have taken place at a subsequent period; and this is the question upon which I insist.
  I believe that every epoch has resulted from several limited movements, which have taken place in the same or in different directions; but as yet our collection of facts as to directions and inclinations is not sufficient to enable us to subdivide each period, but this may possibly be afterwards accomplished.
  In sketching out the position of the European Islands before the formation of the carboniferous series, I enumerated, after the isles or emerged and upheaved masses, a series of submarine chains or rocks placed at an inferior level, and composed of the newest transition rocks. M. de Beaumont has taken a part of these last to construct his second system of-elevation, or that of the Ballons (Vosges), and the hills of the Bocage (Calvados). This system would also comprise a part of the interior of Brittany, a portion of the south-eastern part of the Vosges and of the Lozere, the anthracitiferous rocks of Southern Iceland, and some hills of greywacke and slate in Devonshire and Somersetshire. Lastly, M. de Beaumont has included in this system the hills of greywacke to the N.W. of Magdeburg, the hills of Sandomirz in S.W. Poland, and the formation of the N.N. E. escarpment of the Hartz.
This elevation, anterior to the old red sandstone formation, would present anomalies in the direction of the dislocations. Now, Mr Weaver assigns to the anthracitiferous rocks of Southern Iceland, a general direction from west to east, with an inclination to the south and north. In Devonshire and Somersetshire, the direction is W. 10°, N. to E. 10° S. We thus perceive the pliableness which M. de Beaumont has given to his system, a quality which makes it agree still less with systematic ideas. On the other hand, he has thus been enabled to answer skilfully the objection made by Messrs Sedgwick, De la Beche, and Connybeare, in regard to the parallelism of elevation of the older rocks in western England, and in the south of Ireland, where these gentlemen think they have observed contemporaneous upheavings from the E. of N.E. to the W. of S.W., and from E. to W. I have pointed out dislocations in Hungary which run from E. to W., and which are of a more recent age than the preceding. 
  The third system of elevation, that of the North of England, has been founded on the able observations of Mr Sedgwick, who has shewn that England is traversed by a hilly carboniferous axis, which runs from S. toN., but bends a little to the N.N.W. The consequence of this is the occurrence of great faults in Derbyshire, at the foot of Crossfell and the Craven hills, as well as in the anticlinal line of the western moors of Yorkshire. All these fractures have preceded the formation of the old red sandstone, and indicate a violent and momentary action with which Mr Sedgwick connects also the eruption of the trap rocks and the toadstones.
  M. de Beaumont thinks that traces of these dislocations are to be found in the Malvern Hills, the neighbourhood of Bristol, on the western coast of the department de la Manche, perhaps in the hills of Tarere, the chain of Les Maures, and the primitive hills of Corsica.
  I have also given examples of fractures in the direction from north to south in Hungary, Styria, and Carinthia, but of an entirely different date; certainly more recent than the greensand. But my objections have become useless, since M. de Beaumont now acknowledges the possibility of the parallelism of upheavings (rsdressemens) which have taken place at different epochs.
  The fourth system of elevation is that of the Netherlands and the Southern part of Wales. Freislebcn arid other geologists have pointed out in the beds of the red secondary sandstone and zechstein of Mansfeld, faults and inflections in a direction nearly from east to west. These accidens seem to M. de Beaumont merely a peculiar case of those irregularities in stratification which are common to all the sedimentary deposits not posterior to the zechstein, from the river Elbe to Wales. In this way he attributes to this system all those singular bendings of the carboniferous strata of the Netherlands and the Bristol Channel. These movements were anterior to the formation of the secondary conglomerates of Malmedy; as well as that of the magnesian conglomerate of England, a rock to which Sedgwick has assigned a date posterior to that of the magnesian limestone of the north of England.
The coal measures of Sarrebruck covered by the horizontal beds of the Vosges sandstone, must have been affected by that disturbance, and this subject deserves the further consideration of geologists. Now, let us compare what M. de Beaumont tells us about Belgium and the Sarrebruck country, with the objections I made to his first paper in 1830, and the examples I gave of recent elevations in the direction from east to west. M. de Beaumont gets over the difficulties by admitting completely his first system, and a return of the same direction in the upheavings. Yet I still contend, that in the coal measures there are irregularities in the stratification which have had their origin in the mode of formation of the deposit, and which are not to be confounded with dislocations. Professor Merian mentions directions of stratification from east to west in the older formations of the Black Forest, and there are similar examples in Southern Silesia, in Sudermanland and Smoland in Scandinavia, and I do not see well how these accidens can be made to agree with the epoch of elevation of which we have now spoken.
  The fifth system of elevation is that of the Rhine. The Vosges, the Hardt, the Black Forest, and the Odenwald, form two symmetrical groups, which present two long steep acclivities which are rather sinuous, but parallel to each other and also to the bed of the Rhine, and having the direction of N. 21° E. to S. 21° W. These lines are the type of Von Buch's Rhine system.
The escarpments of the Vosges are composed chiefly of sandstone of the Vosges (gres vosgien), and variegated sandstone. Muschelkalk and keuper come in contact with these rocks in an unconformable position, a peculiarity which shows the epoch of formation of this system of fractures. While pointing out this fact in regard to the Vosges, M. de Beaumont does not extend the observation to the Black Forest, where the variegated sandstone is found upon the inclined table land as well as at the foot of the escarpment.  We must also in this case compare Beaumont's views upon the formation of the Vosges and the Black Forest, with those very different ones adopted by my active friend M. Roget. The latter maintains that these mountains are mere central masses with diverging ramifications. 
  M. de Beaumont thinks he can find traces of these dislocations in the directions of some chains, as in the hills between Saone and Loire, in the hills of the centre and the South of France, and in the Mediterranean part of the Var department, although the deposits between the coal measures and the variegated sandstone are not present in these districts. 
  The sixth system of M. de Beaumont is that of the Thilrmgerwald, of the Bohmerwuldgebirge, and Morvan. I shewed some years ago that the Jurassic rocks have been deposited in seas or great gulfs, (Mem. Geolog. vi. p. 48.) These deposits have been formed in a horizontal or gently inclined position, and while some of them have been subsequently upheaved, the rest remained in their original position either in the form of a flat tract of country, a low table land, or pretty high truncated hills as in Bavaria.
  M. de Beaumont assigns to this system a direction W. 40° N. to E. 40° S.; and the formations which were disturbed by its elevation are the beds of the variegated sandstone, of the muschelkalk, and of the keuper as well as the older rocks, and these formations must have formed the steep walls (falaises) at the base of which the Jurassic beds were horizontally extended. The movement took place between the period of the keuper and that of the inferior lias sandstone. As examples, M. de Beaumont mentions the north-eastern part of Germany, the Thiiringerwald, the Western Bohmerwaldgebirge, the neighbourhood of Autun and Avallon, and in Greece the Olympic system of MM. Boblaye and Virlet. In north-east Germany the floetz formations, from the variegated sandstone to the Jura limestone, form curved beds or inclined masses; and it might be a subject of discussion whether these accidens are original, or if all these deposits were at first horizontal. But entering into M. de Beaumont's views, it would be at least necessary to date the upheaving from the epoch of the middle part of the Jurassic formation.
With regard to the Thiiringerwald, the Jurassic deposits and even the lias beds do not touch its base at the west end, and they do not exist between its eastern extremity and the Hartz; and the keuper only approaches its neighbourhood. If the zechstein covers in nearly horizontal beds the secondary sandstone of Eisenach, we can observe near Ilmenau and elsewhere disturbances, and especially singular faults (failles), which extend from the older coal measures to the variegated sandstone. Voigt, Von Hoff, &c. have described these minutely, and the last mentioned distinguished observer, in a recent work on Thuringia, has expressed a suspicion that the muschelkalk has been dislocated and contorted after its formation, and before the formation of the succeeding deposits which occur in its valleys. In the Coburg country, the lias marls and sandstone, as well as the lower Jura limestone, are placed horizontally upon the keuper, which seems to occur in cavities of muschelkalk, and this last is itself covered here and there by the keuper. Near Blumenroth the upper part of the keuper, with a subordinate bed of magnesian limestone, has been upheaved.
The Fichtelgebirge and Bohmerwaldgebirge are connected with the Thuringerwald by the Frankenwald; and Von Hoff mentions that the strike of the beds of this last chain is from N.E. to S.W., a fact which is also shewn by all geological maps. In the Fichtelgebirge and Western Bohmerwaldgebirge, the direction of the strata is from E. N.E. to W. S.W., and the upheaving and upturning seem to have been antecedent to the deposition of the older coal formation in Bohemia and Bavaria. On the other hand, the Olympic system is the oldest in Greece, and, according to MM. Boblayeand Virlet, it has affected only the primary rocks.
The direction nearly from N.W. to S.E., is that of many other chains of hills, as the Bleking in Scandinavia, a part of the Hartz, the hills of Alvensleben, the floetz chain in Westphalia, the hills in Lusatia, a part of the Riesengebirge, the hills of Southern Silesia, the chain of Southern Poland, the older part of Sicily according to Hoffman, &e. The epochs of these ranges of hills are very different from the epoch which, in the opinion of M. de Beaumont, is characterised by this particular direction.
The seventh system of elevation is that ofMount Pilas in the Forez, qf the Cotea"Orj and the Erzgebirge. It would also include the Cevennes and the table-lands of Larzac. M. de Beaumont finds traces of it from the Elbe to the Dordogne, and investigates its influence on the peculiar distribution of cretaceous deposits, and in so doing points out considerations similar to those offered in my Geological and Paleontological Memoirs. The direction of this system is from N.E. to S.W., or from E. 40° N. to W. 40° S., pretty similar to the direction of the first system. This boulversementis supposed to have taken place between the deposition of the Jurassic formation and the commencement of the cretaceous epoch.
Upon this point I must again urge my objections in regard to the Erzgebirge, although I cannot now bring forward for this purpose the position of the coal measures upon the older upheaved strata of that chain, because M. de Beaumont now admits these traces of his first system. As the direction of N.E. to S.W. is frequent in the Erzgebirge, I do not see why this chain should be regarded as belonging to the seventh rather than to the first system. But I must still add, that the celebrated Professor Naumann of Freyberg has given, as the mean direction of the slaty rocks of that district, h. 7.4, or from W. N.W. toE. S.E.: .
  After the primary slaty rocks were raised up in various directions from N.E. to S.W., and from W. N.W. to E.S.E. in the Erzgebirge; from N.W. to S.E., from N. N.W. to S. S.E., from N. N.E. to S. S.W., and from W. N.W. to E.S.E. in the Reisengebirge; and from E. N.E. to W. S.W. in the other chains of Southern Bohemia; that last country must, at a very early period, have formed a great cavity or Caspian Sea, in which were deposited the old coal formation, red secondary sandstone, chalky rocks, and some tertiary argillaceous beds, with lignite. Of all these formations, the greensand and inferior chalk are the only ones which extend beyond the basin to the flat country surrounding the circular mass of hills. These peculiar circumstances of position prove as completely the antiquity of the annular mass of mountains, as does the circumstance of its not having been anywhere cut through before the deposition of the chalk ; so that none of the formations between the secondary sandstone and greensand could have been deposited there. The only other supposition which suggests itself, is to imagine that the Bohemian cavity which received the chalk strata was formed by a sinking down before the cretaceous period, and that it had previously been an undulating tableland,—an hypothesis which would lead us to consider the coal measures and the secondary red sandstone as fluviatile and terrestrial deposits. But the presence of a trilobite limestone would render an additional hypothesis necessary, viz. the repetition of a sinking down, during which process an upheaving en masse must have happened, and this is certainly a very complicated explanation. 
  At the period of the deposition of the greensand formation, a great rent running N. and S. separated the Erzgebirge from the Riesengebirge; and an immense quantity of quartzy debris accumulated there in the form of horizontal or gently inclined beds, and corresponding to the configuration of the surface on which they were deposited. Now, some geologists believe that sienites made an eruption through the chalk and covered this formation, and it is likely that these accidens were accompanied by some disturbance. To such a cause I attribute the upheaving of some inferior beds of the Jurassic system described by Count Munster. Mr Naumann endeavours to connect with these igneous phenomena the local dip of 45°—70° of the greensand at Mariaschein, Liesdorf, and Weilzen near Augsig, which would also be partly the effect of a slipping down. At least we cannot yet draw general conclusions from the facts, as the perfect, or nearly perfect horizontality of the greensand upon the older rocks, is the predominating feature. Such seems to me to be the state of the question. M. de Beaumont explains it according to his own views, but it would be regarded in quite another light by those who like Cordier, Naumann, Rozet, &c. have peculiar ideas on the subject of slaty rocks.
  If M. de Beaumont had not given up his belief in the constancy of the parallelism of direction for every system, I would here point out to him the Western Carpathians running N. E. and S. W., and composed chiefly of greensand beds, which are upheaved in such a manner as to shew that they ought to belong to his eighth and not to his seventh system.
The eighth system is that of Mont Viso. M. de Beaumont admits with me, and in opposition to other geologists, that most of the Alpine summits owe their height to a series of successive elevations, (p. 640). The direction of the dislocation now under consideration, is from N.N.W. to S.S.E.; and the examples are found in the French Alps, the S.W. extremity of the Jura from Nice to Lons le Saulnier, from Noir Moutiers to the southern part of the kingdom of Valencia in Spain; and in the Pindic system, in Greece, pretty nearly parallel to a great arc of a great circle passing through Mont Viso. These disturbances are supposed to have happened between the deposition of the greensand and chloritose chalk, and that of the marly and white chalk.
  As I have already given examples of a direction from N.N.W. to S.S.E., as in the Riesengebirge, one would thus have specimens of the errors to which we are led by the theory of the parallelism of elevations in the same epoch, unless M. de Beaumont can include such cases under his Mont Viso system.
The Pyrenees are the type of his ninth system of elevation, which appeared between the chalk period and the commencement of the tertiary deposits. All geographers have recognised a uniform type of structure in the range of hills extending from Cape Ortegal in Gallicia, to Cape Creuss in Catalonia. On the great scale, it is to be regarded as a congeries of parallel ranges running W. 18° N. to E. 18° S., and in an oblique direction in relation to the line which joins the two extremities.
Pareto and Resume maintain the union of the Apennines with the system of the Pyrenees, while M. de Beaumont persists in his first opinion on the subject. We tell him, that in Italy the direction of the upheaving, and also that of the igneous dikes and veins, is from S.W. to N.E.; while he finds, upon geological or geographical maps, indications of fracture, which those who have been on the spot have not been able to discover. On the other hand, if M. de Beaumont would admit that his ninth system of elevation has, like some of the other systems, taken place in different directions, we should very nearly agree as to the respective position of the tertiary rocks. M. de Beaumont lays much weight upon his preconceived line of the igneous rocks, but their position does not prove much, for, from their fluid or pasty state, they have naturally filled up rents produced during elevations, and yet these rents would be transverse to the axis of the principal movement. Besides, M. de Beaumont himself acknowledges that the ophites are in that particular case.
The other examples given by M. de Beaumont, are the steep wall of the Southern Alps; the Julian Alps; a part of Croatia, Dalmatia, and Bosnia; the Achaic system in Greece; the eastern part of the Carpathians; some parts of the Hartz; and the denudations of the Bray country, of the Wealds of Surrey, of Sussex, and of Kent. I shall not repeat here the distinction it is necessary to make between the denudations and upheavings of beds produced by elevation, and those denudations which result only from convex surfaces covered by gently inclined beds. To give an extreme example, I may remark, that the denudations, elevations, or chalky craters of elevation at Beine near Grignon, and at Meudon near Paris (p. 655), have not yet been admitted by geologists.
Other examples correspond exactly with what I have said upon this subject in my Memoires Geologiques; for every where the greensand has been dislocated and elevated to a great height. But the direction of these redressemens does not seem to be the same in different countries; and I do not see that coincidence which M. de Beaumont perceives. For instance, in the eastern Carpathians, the dislocations, as well as the longitudinal valleys, run N.W. and S.E., and these disturbances are contemporaneous with those which have lifted up the other or western part of the Carpathians from N.E. to S.W. M. de Beaumont has concluded, from the examination of maps, that the chain of the western Carpathians is parallel to the Western Alps; and hence draws the conclusion that their upheaving coincides. Now, if he had been on the spot, he would know that the stratification of the beds forms a kind of diagonal line with the direction of the higher part of the chain; so that if the last corresponds with the direction of the Western Alps, the upheaving of the beds has taken place in a different line. One of two things must be the case; either the stratainthe Western Alps and Carpathians not being parallel, must belong to two different elevations, or, what is more probable, these two ancient table-lands were at the same epoch upheaved and upturned in directions somewhat different. At the foot of the Carpathians alpine blocks are unknown, and the old alluvium, as well as the newest tertiary deposits, are horizontal, but the molasse has been upheaved, as along the Western Alps.
  I do not see how it is easy to get rid of the disagremens of partial accidens parallel to the directions of other older elevations; but with regard to the pretty sinuous line from London to the mouth of the Danube, the southern border of an immense sea, M. de Beaumont does well to remark that the line is undulating, for I think it is so much so, that, leaving the gulfs out of consideration, and supposing it parallel to his Pyreneo-apennine direction, I do not see the conclusion he can draw from it, unless he supposes that the configuration of the whole of Europe was modelled at that period according to that system, a proposition which has still to be proved. 
The tenth system of elevation, is that of the islands of Corsica and Sardinia, and its period of formation that between the deposition of the inferior tertiary strata of Paris and the second tertiary formation, commencing with the Fontainebleau sandstone. The valleys of the Loire, of the Allier, and the Rhone, are supposed to have owed their origin to this system of dislocations. Like Sickler, M. de Beaumont connects with it some basaltic cones of Northern Germany; while Keferstein arranges the basalts of the same country in parallel zones, running east and west.
The tenth system seems to have been established on grounds too unsatisfactory; for the Islands of Corsica and Sardinia have been too little examined to allow of their being taken as its type. The direction N.S. is found also in the beds of a part of Scandinavia (Wermeland, Dalecarlia); in the Oural; the Aldan hills in Siberia; in the S.W. Hartz; in the upper part of the Leine valley in Hanover; on the borders of the Weser and Fulda; in some hills near Paderborn, &c. Now, the epoch of all those upheavings does not accord with that at which M. de Beaumont supposes that Corsica and Sardinia assumed their present configuration. 
  In speaking of the eleventh system, or that of the Western Alps, M. de Beaumont agrees with the geologists who preceded him, in believing that this chain has been formed by a certain number of elevations, repeated at long intervals of time, and mostly in different directions. One of the most recent must have produced the Mont Blanc chain, as we there find the erratic blocks placed upon the uppermost molasse. Von Buch, in 1811, and Von Raumer, in 1817, opposed this fact to the false name of Protogine, which Jurine gave to the rocks of Mont Blanc. 
  M. de Beaumont thinks it is easy to trace in the Alps the intermixture of the systems of elevation, and he mentions in it some circular elevated cavities like that at Lorieche, at Derbarrens, and round Mont Blanc. If M. de Beaumont deciphers so easily the intermixtures (entrecroissemens) of systems, Professor Studer would be desirous to have an answer in regard to a range of hills in the Canton of Berne, where the upheaved beds alter their directions without fracture or perceivable intermixture of system. Studer is a well informed geologist, and one who seeks truth, and is not afraid of being contradicted when he is wrong. 
The upheaving of the Western Alps has taken place in a direction from N.N.E. to S.S.W., or more exactly from N. 26° E. to S, 26°W. In the interior of the Alps the rides having been produced on ground already raised out of the water and hilly, the dislocations have extended only to the chalk formation (compare my Memoires Geologiques, p. 60.); but on the borders of the Alps the middle tertiary rocks have been upheaved, as at Superga near Turin, at the foot of the great Chartreuse in Provence, in Entlibuch, &c. M. de Beaumont finds a relation between the position of the cones of phonolite at Howentwiel and the small island of Ilion; but I think the asserting this is at least hazardous.
  M. de Beaumont also thinks that this system is connected with the direction of the eastern coast of Spain, a chain in Morocco, &c.; and he terminates his account of it by some considerations on the configuration of Europe after this elevation. 
According to M. de Beaumont, the hyaena, the ursus spelaeus, the Siberian elephant, the mastodon, the rhinoceros, and the hippopotamus, perished during that cataclysm,—an hypothesis which, in regard to some of the animals at least, requires confirmation.
The molasses of the Entlibuch are upheaved and inclined, but I do not know that they include the upper part of this deposit, where shells are so abundant, and in which the strata are ordinarily horizontal, or very little inclined, as near Zurich, between Thun and Berne, in Argovia, and elsewhere.
  M. de Beaumont still considers the nagelfluh of the Rigi as part of the molasse; but the very height of the mountain (1875 metres), an elevation which the molasse nowhere else attains, shews that the rock belongs to the inferior cretaceous series. M. Bertrand Geslin has for a long time been of my opinion, and found in it even the fucoidal sandstones of the greensand : and the section given of the Rigi by De la Beche confirms my suspicion.
  M. de Beaumont repeats the error of Messrs Murchison and Sedgwick, who maintain that tertiary rocks occur in the valleys at the northern foot of the Eastern Alps (p. 650.). The Lignite of Hering, in the Tyrol, would be the only case of the kind, but I have already explained why that fluviatile or delta formation is found at the outlet of the valley. On the other hand, the observations made on the base of the Southern Alps near Coma and Vicenza, in the Netherlands, and in the Pyrenees, go to confirm the objections I made to the opinion that the Gosau deposit belongs to the tertiary series. 
  If direction alone were to be attended to, we should include in this eleventh system a part of Scandinavia (Upland, Smoland), Northern Russia, a portion of the Riesenbirge, &c. Now, in Scandinavia there are no rocks newer than the older transition formation; and Mr Ermann believes that the elevation in Russia took place after the formation of the first floetz deposits, an opinion which does not correspond with Beaumont's views.
The twelfth system is that of the great chain of the Alps from the Valais to Lower Austria; it has the direction E. \ N.E. to W. £ S.W.; and was formed between the period of the tertiary deposits, or the terrain de transport ancien, the old alluvium of M. de Beaumont, and the older true alluvium. This elevation caused the dispersion of the rolled alpine blocks, by the sudden melting of snow on the Western Alps; but the bodies of water thus formed, and which transported these blocks, were "des courans diluviens qui n'ont rien de commun avec le deluge de 1'histoire." 
  It is a singular fact, that, in going from west to east, these blocks are not found further than the outlet from the Alps formed by the valley of the Inn; and their size diminishes exceedingly beyond the Rhine valley. In Austria, I have met with no blocks—there are merely pebbles.
  M. de Beaumont ascribes to a more ancient catastrophe the dispersion of the rolled masses of northern Europe (p. 655.); and here compare my Memoires. 
  As examples of his twelfth system, M. de Beaumont mentions the hills of Sainte Baume, of Sainte Victoire, of Leberon, of Ventoux, Mount Pilate, the two Mythens near Schwitz, &c.; the lines of the higher hills of Spain, and the northern chain of Sicily. He also connects with it the gypsum and the salt deposits, and the salt spring, together with the eruptions of the ophite or diorite in the Pyrenees and in Spain, n .The shores of the seas of these early periods produced lines pretty nearly parallel to the direction of the great chain of the Alps. 
  M. de Beaumont acknowledges that this elevation produced in the south-east of France a double inclined plane, on the one side ascending from Dijon and Bourges to the Forez and Auvergne, and on the other from the shores of the Mediterranean to the same districts. He then makes out a line of culminating points from Hungary to Auvergne, which would explain some of the anomalies in the geodesic measurements. Lastly, he connects with it very well the formation of rents or great valleys in the Cantal and Mont Dore; giving to some parts of the latter the name of craters of elevation. 
Taking the direction as a guide, one would include in the same system with the Alps the chain of Fogares in southern Transylvania and the Balkan; yet in the former it is only the greensand which is upheaved, and in the latter only the alpine Jura limestone.
With regard to the parallelism or coincidence of origin which M. de Beaumont has established between his epochs of elevation, and the formation of the various chains, I shall rest satisfied with a few observations, as we yet possess too limited a collection of facts, and our maps are so imperfect.
  I do not see reasons for believing that the Alleghanys and the Gaults of Malabar were elevated at the same time as the Pyrenees. No one has ever observed greensand on the summit of the Alleghanys, a range of mountains composed of slaty rocks which are more or less crystalline and arenaceous, or of older schistose rocks. Some old coal measures occur at their base, and at some distance, some red saliferous sandstones. The sections of Maclure, Brown, Taylor, Hitchcock, and other American mineralogists, show that this chain was elevated before the deposition of the old coal strata, but it has, perhaps, subsequently been subjected to some dislocations. The Gaults of Malabar have, according to Dr Hardie and other geologists, a direction from north to south, or rather a little to the west of north to a little to the east of south. They are composed chiefly of granite, crystalline slates, and trap-rocks, a geological constitution which at once excludes the idea of correspondence with the Pyrenees. They are probably a continuation of hilly ranges, elevated before the deposition of the old coal measures, and before that of the red saliferous sandstone of India; and regarding them in this light, one does not see what relation they can have with the present configuration of the Pyrenees. It is more likely that the mountains of the Crimea and the Caucasus were connected with the elevation of the Carpathians and Pyrenees.
The connecting the upheaved northern chain of Norway with that of the Western Alps (an idea founded on the direction of the chains given in maps) remains a mere hypothesis, as there is a total want of floetz and tertiary rocks in Norway. From the North Cape to the White Cape in Africa, the general tine of the European shores had, according to M. de Beaumont, the direction of that elevation. The great Alps would be represented by the Atlas and by the central chains of the Caucasus and the Himalaya. 
The Himalaya range has not the direction of the Eastern Alps, as is well seen in the excellent map of Professor Ritter. According to that learned geographer, this great range runs N.W. and S.E.
 Dr Hardie gives it more accurately perhaps a direction N. 25° W. to S. 25° E. If it were parallel to the chain of the Alps, it would have a more easterly direction. The cretaceous shelly deposits on its summits, and the gently inclined molasse strata at its southern base, would lead us to suppose that its last upheavings took place at the tertiary epoch, or perhaps after the molasse. Excepting in the valleys, primary blocks have been observed only on the sides of the Indau Kooh.
The analogy of position and fertility in Lombardy and the valley of the Ganges, pointed out by Professor Ritter and M. de Beaumont, is accidental, and is the consequence of the direction of the waters of the Po and the Ganges in longitudinal valleys at the base of high ranges of hills. It has been supposed that the valley of the Indus communicates with that of the Ganges by a narrow and strait neck; and yet Dr Hardie found, to the south-west of Delhi, between the two valleys, a considerable chain of hills, the Neilgerrhi, 60 miles in length, and sometimes attaining a height of 5000 feet.
  M. de Beaumont now gives up his Deluge Historique mentioned in his first edition, and, like Mr Sedgwick, believes that it was only a local event (p. 661). He thinks with Mr Lyell, and other geologists of the old and the modern schools, that "les causes qui ont produit les phenomenes geologiques, subsistent encore, et que la tranquillite dont nous jouissons aujourd'hui est due a leur sommeil bien plutot qu' a leur aneantissement," (p. 662.) He differs, in this respect, from Brongniart's opinion (Tableau des Terrains); but, in the mean time, he returns to the ideas of this last geologist, and to my own, in supposing that the creating or modifying causes have formerly shewn an energy superior to that with which they have been acting since the establishment of actual societies, and that there have been periods of comparative tranquillity, (p. 663.) In this respect he is far from agreeing with Mr Lyell.
The elevation of mountain chains cannot be ascribed to the continued operation of Plutonic action, but we must rather, with Cordier, and other philosophers, seek for the cause in the " refroidissement seculaire," that is the gradual diffusion of the primordial heat to which our planet owes its spheroidal form, and the generally regular disposition of the layers of the globe from the centre to the circumference, in the order of their specific gravity. The refrigeration would tend to establish a relation between the capacity of the solid crust and the volume of the interior mass still in a fluid condition; and the upheavings or prominences would be the consequence of a diminution of the capacity of the solid crust, in consequence'of the " retrait" produced by the gradual refrigeration of the masses in the interior, (p. 665). These are the views which M. de Beaumont entertains.

