The Palseohydrography is an old principle in geology, and is even still considered so by geographers and theoretical geologists who have not a correct knowledge of all the facts upon which this doctrine is founded. Water having covered the surface of the earth from the time that temperature permitted it, its abrading effects must have been in action during all periods of time. During each of these periods there were sea-shores, sea-cliffs, river-beds, and the like. Many of the sea water-marks have, in all probability, been destroyed by the length of these various operations, but here and there some still exist ; and it now remains for the expert geologist to arrive at the date of the origin of each of these. We will then be able to draw general geognetic conclusions from such a mass of well-established facts. We have an able essay on this interesting subject by Mr Robert Chambers. It is necessary to proceed in this inquiry from the most recent phenomena to the oldest, as I have already shewn in a memoir on the subject. From the watermarks of a fresh-water lake that is now empty, we come to those of interior seas, of Mediterraneans, and last of Oceans. From these, we proceed to the water-marks of Tertiary and Secondary seas, and combine these facts with those given by the theory of elevation and subsidence of the earth's surface. Palaeontology is highly useful in this inquiry, for instance,in the determination of ancient deltas, the course of ancient rivers, and the depth of seas, as ascertained by lithophagi. Still geodesy, and a knowledge of the bottom of seas, are two things which would forward our views of these mighty 
changes. It would enable us to trace over the whole of the earth's surface, not only the abrading and upfilling action of water, but also the extent of subsidences, and of volcanic effects. At present we have only very small indications of these ; for instance, one seems warranted to admit to the west of Europe an old large continent or island, —not only till the middle Tertiary period, but probably to the old Alluvial time. The proofs of it are the state of destruction and steepness of the western shores, their islands, the submarine forests, the direction of sea currents, the elevation of neighbouring continents, the geographical distribution of certain plants and animals in the now isolated western parts of Europe. 
To the east of North and South America old land seems also to have subsided in the sea, and some summits of the hills form now only islands. In the Pacific, Darwin shews us an extensive subsidence in quite an opposite direction, viz., from east to west, where now so many coral islands exist, or are in formation. Along Western America, on the contrary, is a deep sea, the bottom of which has a tendency to elevation. The greatness of this action is proved by the high chains along the seashores which run like the meridian. It is apparently the mightiest on the earth's surface, and it is probable that it gave rise also to the greatest subsidences in the Pacific. If we pass to Asia, we find between Hindostan and Australia, with its satellites, New Guinea, New Brittany, the Solomon's Isles, New Caledonia, the New Hebrides, and New Zealand, the best indications of considerable subsidences, namely, many islands or divided continents, steep shores, rugged cliffs, and volcanoes, as well as a very particular distribution of vegetable and animal life. During the same time, probably, subsidences took place around the Hindostan triangular
peninsula, and especially to the south of it. The same may be said for the neighbourhood of South Africa and on both sides of it ; for we find to the east fragments of continents under the form of islands. In the Atlantic similar indications of older islands exist. At last at the poles great subsidences may have been produced by the force which tended to flatten these ; the many Polar islands may also have been derived from it. But the Arctic lands possess a more powerful agent of change than the Antarctic ; many large rivers flow into the Arctic, and produce every year great motions in the ice-fields ; in the Antarctic, snow and ice alone exercise their powers, and the temperature is not so low as at the opposite pole, but the winter is eternal. The parti-
cular external form of the Austral Polar continent, with its two points and re-entering angles, have been adduced by Hombron as proofs of their ancient separation from the southern continents. When we arrive at the following interesting conclu
sions, we unite to the preceding great subsidences in the oceans, the greatest continental elevations, not only as chains 
but also as vaults of whole continents ; and take besides as true, and probably founded on physico-magnetical laws, the well-known doctrine of M. Leblanc, that each direction of elevation cuts the preceding under a right angle, or at least 
under a very great one. Without going through all the elevation periods either of MM. Leblanc or Beaumont, we may remain satisfied with shewing that the active and extinct volcanoes of South-Eastern Asia, as well as those of Mexico, Guatemala, and 
Oregon, cut transversely the older chains of those countries. Elie de Beaumont remarked, besides, that the various eleva-
tions in America have changed invariably their positions from east to west ; but quite the contrary happened in Asia 
and Europe, where this change took place from north to south. We have thrown some light on the nature of Polar countries, 
where ice and snow have nearly stopped every formation newer than the old coal formation, and have preserved us a 
picture of the state of land and water in that remote period. On the other hand, the great subsidences in the Atlantic to 
the west of Europe and Africa, are inclined from north to south, and seem to have taken place chiefly after the old alluvial period, at the same time that the central parts of Europe and Africa were raised into the E.W. direction. In Asia it would seem also that the great central elevation of this continent preceded the end of the alluvial time, and the direction of the eastern part of both Indian Peninsulas was changed to N.S. The elevations and vault of the American meridian chains 
were later events than the motions in the Old World ; but these phenomena were similar, in as far as regards the transverse crossing of the great E.W. subsidence of the Pacific. We ought not to forget that in every see-saw motion there takes place a subsidence as well as an elevation, a principle which is well exemplified in the plastic form of the earth's surface. 
When the heights of central Europe, Africa, and Asia, with some parts of the countries of the Mexican Gulf, were raised during the alluvial period, in an equatorial direction, some extensive parts of the low and flat countries of Northern Europe, Siberia, and even North America, were depressed in the same direction, and this gave rise to the erratic phenomena. Similar subsidences took place in that direction in the south of Europe, Africa, and Asia, for instance in the Mediterranean, the Gulf of Mexico, &c.
On the contrary, when the meridian chains of North America were elevated, those of Eastern America were depressed, especially in South America, where older islands disappeared entirely under the Atlantic. Again the contrary took place : with the indications of elevation of the western coast of America, we see a part of Greenland, and of Arctic America subside. In the Old World the Siberian shores of the Icy Sea, as well as the bosom of the Baltic and Scandinavia, were elevated. All these see-saw-like motions took place in quite contrary directions. In the recent Tertiary period, we find some elevations in the meridian direction in the Old as well as in the New World, but these were preceded by equatorial subsidences. About the same time, facts shew, on the con-
trary, immense equatorial elevations in Central Europe and Asia. Let us go back to the secondary periods, and we find connected with Europe, Africa, Asia, and America, great oceans with islands, and we also find that these become more free the further we go back to the primitive times of the earth. These oceans seem, according to the forms of the actual continents and to their geognosy, to have extended in an equatorial direction, exactly the contrary of our present oceans, which are in the meridian direction. The islands and continents of those remote times extended, on the other hand, especially N.S., such as the partly-de-
stroyed islands of Western Europe, Scandinavia, Arctic America, Eastern and Southern Asia, Southern Africa, the Eastern partly-destroyed America, the Western America, the Eastern New Holland. 
If we go still further back in the primary period, we find many continents or islands which extend parallel to the equator, viz., around both the poles, between the tropics, and probably, also, in the warmer parts of the temperate zones, but the seas or the subsidences were then exactly in a contrary direction. 
Under the great causes of changes of the earth's surface, we must next mention the dynamic motions, and also reckon the destruction produced by the eternal tendency of the water to turn round the middle of the earth as much as possible after the astronomical laws. When we are forced to admit the mentioned cruciform alternation of the dynamic relations, it is only what we would expect to find in a spheroidal body which has an igneous fluidity in the interior, a rigid surface partly covered with water, and turning round itself. Every one admits that the centrifugal force in the course of time has given rise to a 
flattening of the poles, as well as to an elevation against the equator ; but this change in the spheroid must have produced rents and subsidences in both equatorial and meridian-like directions. According to mathematical laws, the equatorial subsidences were contemporaneous with the elevations, but not with the meridian-like subsidences, because these appeared later, and owing to new elevated parts of the earth's surface, resulting from the subsidence of the rigid parts upon the molten mass, and these parts appear to have been so much forced from their former position between the new vaults, as to have preserved a compression upon them. Those meridian-like subsidences must have had a tendency to produce only in N.S. direction, long and oval basins, and 
not circular ones, in E.W. direction ; which, on the contrary, was always the case between two equatorial elevations. The 
Mediterranean is an example of the last. Finally, we must add the fact which concords with the rotation of a body whose 
interior is igneous, viz., the arches or higher parts of the earth's body, formed in consequence of the centrifugal force, 
are parallel to each other, but no one of these goes entirely round the earth as a continued line. The Alps, Taurus, 
Himalaya, and the chains of Central Africa, are examples of this kind. Is it not possible to estimate the value of the various elevations and subsidences on the earth's surface, at different periods of time ?It is possible, — but our knowledge in astronomy, physics, and geology is still too imperfect to allow of more than an approach to the answer. Let us take the simplest case of an island composed of horizontal marine beds. We would measure the depth of the sea and the height of the highest mountain of the island, add these together, and then endeavour to ascertain whether the sea subsided, or the land elevated. As to the last conclusion there remains the question, Does the sea bottom still preserve its original height? This shews us the necessity of having a knowledge of the normal depth of all seas in the primitive time, so that, according to our knowledge of Bathography, and the whole quantity of water on the earth, we might then limit per maxima and minima the same value for 
the various periods. This done, we could then calculate each elevation. Let us now take the case of an island of a roof-like form, where we shall have the elevation of the summit of the roof, we could also obtain the elevation of each isolated parts of 
its inclined phases. If the island is long, with a steep inclination on one side, and a very slightly inclined plane on the other, as for instance, in the North American point, we can estimate the value of the low shore, when we know the elevation of the high and steep chain, but the sea should have on both sides the same depth, which is frequently not the case. The sea can be deep on one side, and shallow on the other, or deep or shallow on both. For this reason, the normal depth of the sea will al-
ways better suit for the calculations. When a rigid part of the earth was elevated, vaults were produced, or in other words, elevations and subsidences, according to the principle of the see-saw motion. If the value of such an elevation above the level of the sea is found, it is easy to obtain that of the subsidences under water, because both values are determined by an equal angle around a fixed point. A country might have been subjected to a simple see-saw like motion, as England for instance, where one shore is high and hilly, and the other flat, with subsidences in the Northern sea. The middle of an island can have been vaulted with a kind of double see-saw motion, of which the two elevated extremities represent the middle of the vault. The subsidences of both sides under the sea-level would equal the height of the vault above the sea-level. The variation in the position of the highest part of the elevation changes nothing in the results, the triangles which are to be constructed on both sides, above and below the sea-level, will only become more and more unequal the more the greatest elevation is placed further from the middle part of the observed land on one or other side. If two triangles represent the vault above the sea-level, and 
their base be that level, and if we lengthen these lines on both sides of their relative value in the triangles, and if we do the same with the two lines which descend from the middle of the vault, till the sea-shore on both sides become, through this construction on each side under the sea, similar triangles with angles of equal value as the vault above the sea. This result remains the same whatever irregularity the vault may have ; but in the last case the values of the triangles 
and angles on both sides are unequal. In this way we arrive knowledge of the approximate places of the subsidences, which are never far from that of the elevations, because the value of the elevations known, the length of the lines between the sea-level and the highest point of the vault remains equal to the length of the lines of the subsidences in the triangles. 
As many protuberances of the chains suffered diminutions, we should include them in our calculations ; and should construct the triangle by tangents to the two arches of the vaults, and the lost summit would be restored approximately by this construction. This method seems also to give us a mean to determine in the interior of the earth the place where the elevation began, because the causes of it are lower. It is only necessary to add to the height of the highest point of the elevated vault above the sea-level, the normal covering of the compact part of the earth under the normal depth of the sea, and then to lengthen these lines in its entire value in the interior of the earth. This way of proceeding is the same, whether the elevation be a primitive one, or may have taken place where others already were formed, The normal depth of sea being necessarily a value equal to the normal thickness of the last compact and rigid covering of the earth's surface, and, on the other hand, the elevated parts of the earth's surface having had their place in the interior of the earth before this motion, we have the depth of the cause of elevation. Now if Ac = 26, 000 feet, as in the Himalayas, and CF = 2000 feet, we would already have for the depth + —56,000 feet,
which is not far from that to which calculations on the temperature of the earth have conducted M. Cordier ; at least it will be so when we correct the now acknowledged errors in some facts on which Cordier' s calculations rest, and also take into consideration the destruction of the summit of the chains. 
In this way we should obtain an idea of the true site of volcanic action ; or of the very unequal limits where there is 
in the earthy mass already complete rigidity on one side and igneous fluidity on the other. If, according to this, the depth 
of volcanic action is pretty great, still it is not so, as some people would conclude, from the extent of the vibrations of 
earthquakes. As that depth must be in extensive relation with our highest chains, and as the height of our highest hills 
even surpasses the value of their parts in the earth which lie below the sea-level, it is not at all certain that this may 
be everywhere the case. On the contrary, the wrinkles and low parts of the earth's surface, and the depth of the 
volcanic action, or the fluid focus, must have various values according to the different places of the earth. This also 
clears up the different scales of temperature which have been established for different places by the observations on the 
increase of heat according to the depth in the earth. We find, next to elevated points, subsidences of equal 
value in the contrary way. Considering in this way the different elevations in different periods, we find that the 
greatest appeared latest. But it must be observed that the latest elevations must frequently have taken place upon 
already vaulted places, or even on those which have been more than once elevated. Besides the actually highest chains 
are those the least destroyed, and in uniting them with the first formed, may possibly not have been elevated more, or 
may have changed entirely their aspect by frequent subsequent elevations. If the latest elevations have produced the 
greatest protuberances, a similar complicated relation must have taken place for the subsidences. In the primitive time 
the sea was not so deep as now ; this depth increased gradually till our times, when the hydrographic value equalled 
those got by the hypsometry of our highest hills. Can we calculate the numeric value of the vaults of a country and its relative subsidences ? It becomes much more difficult to determine the subsidences which may be produced by the inversion of beds. If one had only one series of beds, elevated in a straight line, we should determine the angle of inclination, the thickness, and the ex
tent of these, and perhaps arrive at the possibility of calculating the space left, as well as the space occupied. This 
simple case is more seldom than the others. Similar considerations may be applied to elevations of beds around a profound central point, a crater or a long rent. Yet, in most cases of elevation with upright standing beds, there are convolutions, divisions, various inclinations, fallings in, and later destructions ; besides, one period of elevation may complicate itself frequently with another, and make the problem still more difficult to be resolved. We can only resolve these by an approximative calculation by maxima and minima. One can calculate nearly the surface of a chain with the value of the space of its valley, and then estimate the value of the space of the hills, and on the whole as a compact mass of certain geometrical form, as for instance as a triangular division with two truncatures at the ends. One would consider the whole as pushed out of the soil. One should also 
reckon what such a chain was once, and what it probably lost by subsequent destructions. In that way one sees the 
possibility at least of arriving at an approximate result for the value of subsidences produced by such elevations of 
chains. 
Great elevations of the earth's crust have left subterranean vacuities, and their number increases with the height of chains. I do not believe that there now exists voids equal to our chains ; that would destroy naturally all our calculations. If they do really exist, earthquakes would indicate them, from the sea-water entering into such spaces. These are not necessary to explain the extent of earthquakes, for they are in a great measure the extent of vibrations of all dense bodies. 
To enlighten the solution of the former problem in question, we should put to ourselves the following question : — Is it 
possible to determine a normal depth of the sea during different times, in certain limits ; and would it be quite impossible 
to find out, if not the value of each individual elevation, at least the general value of all elevations in each period ? This 
question is rendered soluble by what has been already obtained by calculations upon the solution, the refrigeration and contraction of the earth, and by other facts given by geography and geology. If we had already only an approximative estimation of the value of each period of elevation, we could answer the question about the elevations and subsidences for each period in every country of the globe. 
It is not now sufficient to trace the presence of the sea everywhere ; but we must determine also its depth. If we knew how much, and in what quantity, a land or chain has been elevated or depressed, we could determine the depth of the sea-water by the height of the marine beds, which are still horizontal. But we should be very prudent in such determinations, and especially not to draw conclusions from individual countries. When the obtained halves are found applicable to the chief known parts of the earth, we can come to rational conclusions, for we can learn by comparison how much nearly a given country is elevated or subsided. And we can hope to arrive at the maxima and minima of elevations and subsidences in a given period of time, because many formations 
in the earth give at least a maximum of height and subsidence. 
As I conceive the solution of the problem, it would be found if the two following facts are admitted as sufficiently 
proved: — 
1st, What the globe always was ; and if it has remained the same, nothing can be lost except the heat, which is of no 
value to us in this consideration. Yet many things have been changed on earth, for instance a part of the water has been 
turned into ice, and a greater quantity of fresh -water currents, and of subterranean water, have taken the place of the 
former much greater humidity in the atmosphere. Perhaps the salt formations may be in some relation with this difference between the quantity of fresh and salt water in the primitive times, and in later periods. 
2d, The protuberances and low places of the earth's surface are in equal relations to the rigid and fluid parts of the 
globe ; or, in other words, all the values of the heights of the earth are found to differ when related with cavities. The
protuberances lessen the place of the fluid in the same measure as the corresponding cavities do make.
When the geographical value of the extent of land and water is known, it is possible then to determine by bathography and geodesy the extent of the waters of all seas, as well as that of the protuberances of our earth spheroid. 
These numbers got, we could establish with them a normal medium for the thickness of the last covering of the rigid 
part of the globe, which forms especially now the continents and heights ; in the meantime, one would deduce from the 
extent of the fluid, the medial height with which this water once surrounded the rigid part. On this base all the changes 
known would have followed, and we could estimate all the values of subsidences and elevations. 
Afterwards one would determine exactly the geographical surface and space of the continents in each great geological 
period, to get the value of the place and space occupied during the same times by the water. To replace the surface of the 
land which probably was lost by subsidence in some geological periods, one should employ the probability of calcula-
tions which may be based on what remained from each period, on the mode of distribution of continents from the beginning 
till now. But an absolute necessity would always remain, viz., the knowledge of the greatness of each series of elevations in each period. To get this, it is only necessary to make the following reasoning. As we know now the mutual relation of the surface of the actual seas to that of land, as well as to what these were in the alluvial period, we can then conclude what surface the sea covered in the tertiary time ; we must subtract from the value of the surface of land in the alluvial period, that which it had in the tertiary, and add this difference to the sum of the surface value of the sea in the old alluvial period. 
But when two seas of the kind have not the same surface value, the smaller must replace the want of space by the greater depth. This necessity is the best proof that the seas have gained in depth from the oldest time till now, and that in exact proportion as the land became always greater and greater in extent. First there existed only islands, and for that reason a shallow sea ; the more this extended, the deeper the sea became.
On the other hand, as the cavities of the earth's surface are in time in relation with their chains and protuberances, we ascertain by this a mean to determine for each geological period the greatness at least of the median value of the ele-
vations ; not only for the general one as vaults, hut also for the more particular as cliains, and that through the median 
value not only of the greatest subsidences, but also through that of the deepest rents in the sea bottom. 
We can say the following : — When we find for a sea a certain medium of depth, which has a determined value of surface, and a determined quantity of water, what medium of depth will another sea have with another value of surface and quantity of water ? When we have got this medium depth or medium value of subsidences, we can positively deduce from it the medium value of the elevations. 
But the medial value and the place of the greater protuberances of the earth's surface are in constant relation with the height of the greatest chains and their places on the earth's surface ; so that we have a mean to conclude something approximatively for the chains, which may possibly surpass the medium value of the elevations in each period. This is enough to shew how important are such determinations of orographical medium value, as they were traced by Humboldt, Strantz, Berghaus, and others.
Some may object that we shall never either know the true place of lands and seas, nor the greatest elevations and subsidences in the various geological periods, notwithstanding we may arrive at the knowledge of the medium value of the elevations and subsidences, as well as at that of the sea depth. Our physical and astronomical knowledge is truly not yet sufficient for it, but geology seems to give hope for the solution of the problem. I would, for instance, expect a natural result when one remembers that subsidences are always in the neighbourhood of the elevations, or vice versa, as in the see-saw ; one would determine the 
rest by traces left of the one or other of these events. Secondly, one must employ Leblanc's doctrine of the constant opposition in the directions of two events of the kind, which follow one another, and apply this to all the events of the kind, from the actual state and place of the protuberances, chains, and cavities now existing, to those in the remotest times. A third important document is furnished by the palseontological geography. The countries where identical petrifactions lie in a formation, may be distributed in countries very distant from one another, yet they were covered by the same sea, or even one same channel of 
salt water, notwithstanding now large chains intervene between them. The certainty of such palseontological indications increases with the more recent age of the formations, and diminishes the more one considers an older formation. The following are some examples. 
A great similarity is known between the miocene beds of Italy, of the Adriatic, of European Turkey, as well as of Austria and Switzerland. This proves the old free communication of the Miocene sea on both sides of the Alps, notwithstanding the differences of climate and the chains interspersed. In the Eocene period, the extent of the nummulitic beds indicates the free union of the basins of the Euphrates and Tigris with the Mediterranean and the old eocene sea round the Alps. On the contrary, the difference between the tertiary fossils in Chili and the Pampas, shews that these two neighbouring countries, notwithstanding under the same latitude, were already separated in the tertiary period by a mighty dike composed mostly of trachytes ; a circumstance which 
explains also the great mass of agates and of red argil amongst the inferior tertiary beds of the Pampas. In a 
similar way D'Archiac has been able to prove that the tertiary basin of northern France was hardly connected with 
Belgium and England, because at the place of the present British Channel there extended a chain in NES. direction ; for that reason the shells of the red crag of Suffolk, and the crag of Belgium, are not those of the faluns of the middle of 
France. On the other hand, the differences in the chalk formation around the Mediterranean, and in the NW. of Europe, compel us to believe that in that period there was a great difference of climate as well as a separation of the two seas.
The comparison of the Jura in the Alps and Mediterranean countries with that in Central Europe, has often induced geologists to acknowledge in that time two seas of very different depth as well as very divided seas. Lastly, the peculiarities of the Muschelkalk in the German Alps, in Superior Italy, and in Superior Silesia, give proofs of the existence then of a sea channel where now the Alps partly raise their heads.  
In taking another view of the subject, one finds still another mode of coming to conclusions. I mean, to make use of all that we know of the various thickness of the formations, and the variation in the same formation, as well as of the absolute height they attain in different countries. But on this our information is still very small. 
I must remark, 1st, That the fresh-water formations, like the alluvial and Travertine deposits, are to be found at very 
different heights and in very different thickness ; 2d, That the various heights of actual seas shew the former existence 
of a sea in the same way at different altitudes. Besides, we have proofs that seas were formerly much more numerous,
and sometimes placed on levels one above the other. This gives an idea how a part of the water has found room in older times on the earth. The salt-water sea has been converted into fresh- water before it became empty, or after having become partly empty. If we had, for instance, the medium value of the depth of sea in the old alluvial period, we could say how deep that sea was in Northern Europe when the erratic phenomena took place, because the boulders indicated its height in the southern part of this basin, where they came upon the ice floating, and not by glaciers, as in Scandinavia. 
On the other hand, one could fall into error if one would, from the results gained in this way, conclude about the depth 
and absolute height of the sea at the foot of the Alps during these times, or during the tertiary period, because probably 
a sea was there on a higher level than that of Northern Europe. 
3d, The difference in the thickness and absolute height of each formation furnishes us the means to know the depth of each sea upon its shores, as well as at a distance from them, notwithstanding that certain places, or frequently the deepest, may have received no deposit at all ; but it must not be forgotten to subtract always from the absolute height the possible value of the elevation to which the whole country or basin has been subjected. For that reason, we attain a much more certain conclusion upon the depth of the sea, when we measure the height of a formation only above that of the basin in which it lies. The bed must be then horizontal, and contain shells of which the animals were littoral, or lived in waters of a certain depth. If the rocks are, on the contrary, only alluvial, or conglomerates without fossils, then their height gives no certain indications for the depth of
the sea, because the bottom of the basin may have been upraised. 
4th, One should always attempt to determine by the fossils if a formation was littoral or formed in lagunes of salt water,
or in a deep sea. Such being the case, the study of malcology and actinology, or, in other words, the study of the life of 
molluscs and zoophytes, becomes daily more important to geologists. 
The Tertiary Sea appears to have been between 2000 and 3000 feet deep along its shores, but not more than 900 or 2000 in its channels and straits. The greatest heights of these formations have been produced by the elevation of their bottoms, or by the inversions of their beds. For example, they are in Switzerland 4000 feet, in Bolivia 16,000 feet and the like. These limits are confirmed by the heights of tertiary beds which have been deposited in Mediterranean Seas on a higher level than the ocean. The greatest absolute height of the bottom of these former interior seas varies from a few feet to 500 in Europe at least ; but we still want information on this subject. 
As the Tertiary beds were deposited in basins and on shores, and as such deposits did not occur in the deepest places, the Tertiary period must have had depths in their seas that reached from 3000 to 4000 feet.
The chalk formation consists of marine formations in deep water, and of a littoral one. The seas during that time must have been very similar to the tertiary period, having a depth of from 600 to 800 feet ; but the chalk itself was deposited in water of a depth varying from 1200 or 1300 to 3000 feet. 
The Jura Sea, or at least that part of it where the Jurassic beds were formed, was a sea of more than 3000 feet in depth. 
The littoral deposits of the seas were formed under a sea of 1300 or 1500 feet in depth, — the coral rag, similar shallow 
sea. In Western Europe we find for it the latter, a sea of nearly 800 feet deep, or even less. 
The Trias formation shews by its thickness that its sea had a depth of at least 3000 feet, with occasional places 
more shallow. 
The Zechstein and the red secondary sandstone were deposited upon shores in water less than 1000 feet deep. This is confirmed by coralline formations and plutonic eruptions. 
In the primary periods the seas were deep and shallow ; the deep about 2000 or 3000 feet in depth, the shallow indicated by the many coral deposits found in the formations. 
In taking a general glance of the value of these depths in the various periods of time, we learn that the marine formation never covered the whole sea bottom. Besides the deposits on shores and in sea channels or straits, and from currents that now accumulate in our deeper seas, we have a great part of the sea bottom that remains now as formerly uncovered by aqueous deposits. It is difficult to calculate the present extent of plutonic eruption that takes place ; but it appears that volcanic matters are accumulating now in deep seas, as must have been the case formerly. But this will seldom occur in the deepest places where the pressure is very great.
These values of the deep and deepest places can be established still for each period, if we admit that the scale of subsidences from the older times to the newer is an ascending one like that of elevations and vaultings. In this case we can use the height which some formations attain through elevation ; by which events the exact time is given by the geognostical relations of position. The inclination or immersion of beds, and the repetition of elevation on the same spots, do not render this more difficult, because the same took place for the subsidences. 
In the old alluvial and recent tertiary periods, the great Sea Depths and their middle depths were nearly those of our 
present seas, which we can prove especially by the height of volcanic mountains and chains. In the tertiary times the 
elevations of the chalk and eocene formations indicate sea depths of 8000, 9000, 10,000, to 24,000 feet, which was the 
case immediately after the chalk period. The middle sea depth of the ocean may have been then from 4000 to 5000 feet. 
In the chalk period) the height of the elevated Jurassic beds indicates seas of from 6000 to 11,000 feet, and probably 
still more in depth when we consider the Himalaya. Their middle depth may have varied between 2000 and 3000 feet. In 
the Jura period the heights of the elevated Trias seem not favourable to the existence of sea depths of that greatness. 
The middle depth may probably have been 3500 feet, and the deepest places may have measured 5000 to 6000 feet. 
In the Trias period the well-known elevations of old formations, as well as the great plutonic deposits, appear to indicate for the deepest places of the seas between 4000 and 5000 feet, and the middle depth may not be far from 2500 feet. 
The greatest known height of the Trias exists in Bolivia, where it is preserved still partly on both sides of the eastern 
Cordillera, and reaches sometimes, according to D'Orbigny, the height of 2000 feet, a circumstance only to be explained by elevation. 
Lastly, in olden times the sea may have had no deep places, and only a middle depth of from 2000 to 3000 feet ; for all the high summits of older rocks are only the consequence of later elevations, but, on the contrary, all the rest of the oldest islands or continents do present themselves only as very low hills or even plains. 
When we construct a table of the values of the probable depths of the sea at different times on its shores, as well as in 
the middle, we come to the following interesting results : — 
1st, When the deepest places of the primary sea were about 2000 to 3000 feet, the middle value of the deepest places in 
the Trias and Jura periods was about 4000 feet ; in the chalk 8000 feet ; in the tertiary 16,000 feet, and in the older 
alluvial and actual periods 18,000 feet. This furnishes us with a kind of scale of value like that given by the subsidences in the seas during the alluvial period. I shewed that this last scale, expressed by the numbers 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and others, corre
sponds to the number of feet of the subsidences. 
2d, The possibility and impossibility of animal life under certain depths of water, conduce to the belief that the seas 
and their shores must have had always the same depths as now. Molluscs and zoophytes live, the first to a depth of 
600 feet, the latter to a depth of about 976 or even 1000 feet, but their most common habitation is of far less depth. 
For example, the ostrea lives only at the depth of from 40 to 60 feet. In looking over the value of sea depths at the 
time of deposition of the various formations, we find for all times a depth of the sea on its shores only of 100, 200, to 600 
feet in value. 
3d, Between these shores and the deepest places of the sea. — Our table shews that this sea depth was always more 
than 1000 feet, and from the time of Trias till later it may have measured already 3000 feet. In the meantime, in the 
chalk and more recent periods, other values of depth may have added themselves to the former, because deeper valleys 
at the bottom of the sea shew more extensive inclined planes. 
According to this, we find that the sea had depths in the Jura period of 4000 to 5000 feet ; in the chalk period, depths 
of 4000 to 6000 or even 8000 feet ; in the tertiary times, depths of 4000 to 20,000 feet; and in the actual period, 
depths of from 4000 to 24,000 feet. 
4th, We arrive, lastly, at the final result, that the value of 1500 to 2000 feet expressed nearly the middle value of 
the depth of the sea at all times, and that this depth must have been about that of the sea, if not in the primary, in the 
oldest geological periods. 
But we give the means to determine approximatively this value by another way, so that it is possible to control this geognostic bathographic mode of determination by the more geodetic one. Another control is given us by the estimation made by Humboldt for the maximum of the medium of continental heights, and the height of the point of gravity in the volume of all continents above the present level of the sea. He was led to this by the evident errors of Laplace, who estimated 4000 feet the middle elevation of continents. Humboldt found 157-8 toises, or 307 metres, or 942 feet, for this value, but he left out of consideration and calculation the whole of Africa, where there exist immense plains, as well as very extensive plateaux, and even in the south-east very high and extensive chains. Nor could he have had, during the time of his calculation, an exact idea of the greatness and altitude of the lofty plateaux and plains of North America; and he must have overlooked also all what is called the polar countries or islands, where high chains are not uncommon, especially at the Austral pole. For that reason A. K. Johnston differs already a little from Humboldt; for he admits in Europe, instead of the 105 toises of Humboldt, 671 feet; for North America, instead of 117 toises, 748 feet; for Asia, instead of 180 toises, 1152 feet; for South America, instead of 177 toises, 1151 feet. We arrive in this way at the probability that Humboldt and Johnston's estimations are still too high; but as in our way of reasoning, we must also take into consideration all the parts of the earth's crust which form submarine protuberances, and add this value to the one admitted in continental parts above the sea level; in this way we must arrive evidently at a higher estimation of middle height or thickness, and this will not be far from 1500 to 2000 feet in height for the last wrinkled pellicle of our globe under and above the sea level, which we thought to be able to establish for our whole water-covering of the oceans;On the other side, the values of the elevations and subsidences, or high and low parts of the earth's surface, being equal, an estimation of the maximum for the middle height of continents gives us the means to calculate the whole quantity of sea water through the mutual surface contents of land and water. The mutual relations of these is said to be about 1 : 3 or 2|, but according to Lyell, it is 1:4, 1:3. He admits for the whole earth's surface 148,522,000 square miles, with 37,673,000 square miles dry land, and 110,849,000 square miles of water. In following Laplace's old error of giving to the middle depth of the seas 2 miles or 4 leagues, we arrive at a quantity of water of 55,091,600 cubic leagues, or evenfor all waters on the earth's surface 110,183,200 cubic leagues of Breislak. If Kant fixed the middle depth of seas to half a geographical mile, and Keil to a quarter of a mile, old De la Metherie was still more near the truth in admitting only 1200 to 1500 feet for this value; and by that way he was able to calculate the quantity of the sea water to 1,530,320 cubic leagues. He added also that if the whole earth's surface were flat and covered entirely with water, the depth of it would be only 700 feet, according to the admission of the mentioned value of the quantity. De la Metherie's estimation of the quantity of water must be too great, if other calculations conduct Rozet to believe that this value is 1000 times smaller than the volume of the compact parts of the globe. The volume of the whole spheroid would be, according to Breislak, 1,230,320,000 cubic leagues; according to Daubuisson, 1,079,235,800 cubic myriameters; and according to Reviere, 1,082,634,000. K. M. Beudant allows the quantity of the water on the globe under two millions of cubic myriameters.
When we have once the true value of the sea water and its basin, we can logically conclude from this the value of the dry land. But here is the place to remark that the highest chains are placed always only upon the greatest protuberances or vaults of the earth's surface, which is quite natural; but together give an indication of the maxima and minima values of the elevations upon the whole globe, as well as in each country. In other words, if we find heights from 24,000 to 27,000 feet in South America and the Himalaya, or similar cavities in the Austral seas, we must not believe that there exist in the earth such a force of elevation or subsidence; but that only the last elevations have taken place upon a soil already elevated upon a vault of the earth, and that in the same way the subsidence has happened on parts already subsided. It is yet possible that a chain may be wholly upheaven in later times; but our Alps in Europe shew us that we can hardly admit of a single elevation of 8000 feet at once, for all the summits and pinnacles which reach above 10,000 feet did gain this height only by the inclination of their composing beds. On the other hand, a yet unknown physical law has established an intimate relation between the value of the greatest elevations or upheavings, or highest mountains of each continent and their relative individual extent. A kind of scale of this description is furnished by the Himalaya, the Chimborazo, and Mont Blanc, three continents of unequal greatness.
The same relation is to be observed among the cavities of the earth, for the greatest sea depths are in the Austral seas, where the extent of dry land is to that of water as 1:16. The same may be said of the southern part of the Pacific, which is as large as all the continents together. Oft the contrary, in the Northern Ocean to the 30th lat. north, the sea has only a relative smaller depth, and the dry land fills up there nearly as much space as the water.
We may observe, probably, that the volcanic action may modify our conclusions. We find, for instance, in Mont Blanc only metamorphic rocks, and in the Himalaya, secondary slates, and the highest pinnacles of the Andes nothing else than volcanic cones, so that we can only compare the height of the old vaults upon which these volcanic matters were united.
Volcanic action is still an agent very little known, and its force of elevation has not yet been determined. When we see on certain large volcanic islands, heights like those of Mont Blanc, for instance in Sicily, at Teneriffe, &c, and even still higher peaks in other volcanoes, those immense accumulations of igneous matters do not decide the question, if the volcanic force has been able to elevate a Chimborazo at the height of 24,000 feet from the mentioned normal sea-depth of 1500 to 2000 feet. According to all our observations, it must, on the contrary, be admitted, that the volcanic islands give us the limits of the volcanic force of elevation, and that in other places the height of the base of the volcanoes enables us to judge of their extraordinary altitude. In that way we see the lava flowing constantly from the crater of the Kirauea volcano upon the isle of Hawaii, which is only 3800 feet in height. We see volcanoes like Etna ejecting periodically stones to a height of 6000 feet, but the lava flows only through rents in the sides of the cones far below the high summits. In the Andes, whose trachytic domes predominate, the eruptions are also below, and the ashes and smoke go out above. This position of the volcanoes of South America upon the earth's vaults, may possibly explain how the volcanic phenomena and earthquakes in those countries are much stronger than elsewhere, because the action takes place under a covering filled with more rents, and more easy to be moved, being already bent to a vault. Generally, the higher the volcano, it is the more easily moved; on the contrary, the lower, even when submarine, the motions are, the more difficult, and its effects more local. For in this resides probably partly the difference between the present and the former activity of volcanoes. These have lost very little or nothing of their former exciting cause, but only the secondary circumstances of their possible expansion by this force have been modified by time.
Let us continue our approximative estimation of the Heights of Chains in the primitive periods, according to the mentioned depths of the various seas at different times; the highest hills in the Primary period would be between 1500 to 2000 feet, in the Zechstein period already 3000 to 4000 feet, in the Trias time 4000 to 5000 feet, in the Jura period 5000 to 6000 feet, in the Chalk time 6000 to 11,000 feet, in the Tertiary period 8000 to 20,000 feet, and in the Actual, 10,000 to 26,000 feet. The middle value of these highest pinnacles would be for the period of the Trias and Jura about 4000 feet, in the Chalk period 8000 feet, in the Tertiary period 10,000 feet, and now it would be 12,000 feet.
The mountains next in height would have increased in extent from the oldest times till now, as well as the inclined planes under the sea level. The greatest height of those chains may have attained in the Trias already 3000 feet, in the Jurassic period about 4000 to 5000 feet, in the Chalk period 6000 to 8000 feet, in the Tertiary time about 4000 to 10,000 feet; and now they measured 6000 to 12,000 feet. Their middle value would give only 2000 feet in height for the Trias period, 3000 for the Jurassic,7000 for the Chalk, and 8000 for the Tertiary one.
The greatest height of the hilly countries may have been in the Primary period 1000 feet, in the Zechstein 1500 feet, in the Trias 1600 to 1800 feet, in the Jurassic 2000 feet, in the Chalk 2500 feet, and in the Tertiary at least 3000 feet. Their middle height which varies now between 1500 and 3000 would have attained in the primary times only 600 feet, in the Zechstein period 1000 feet, in the Trias 1500, in the Jurassic 1000 feet, in the Chalk 2000 feet, in the Tertiary time 2500 feet, and in the Alluvial 3000 feet.
On the Middle Height of the lowest parts of the Continents, according to Humboldt and Johnston.
We can limit the estimations for each continent and can draw the conclusion how small that height must have been in the Primitive period. In Europe the middle height gives now only the middle value of 300 feet. As the middle value of the highest chains of the mountains of middle heights of the hilly land in the Alluvial period, is to that in the Primary time about 4 or 5 :1 in the Zechstein, about 3:1 in the Trias, 2:1 in the Jura, as 2, 2 :3 in the Chalk, as 2, 3:3, and in the Tertiary as 2, 5: 3, we obtain by using these researches in the middle height of the lowest parts of the continents in the different Primary periods 60 to 80 feet, in the Zechstein period 100 feet, in the Trias 150 feet, in the Jura 180 feet, in the Chalk about 200 feet, and in the Tertiary 250 feet. These values are naturally contrary to those of the cavities of the parts of the sea bottoms which were the nearest to the shores during the different geological periods.
With the aid of such philosophical collections of heights as Strantz gave us, one might with some difficulty establish by approximations similar values for the breadth of the chains, the height of the plateaux and cols, the breadth of valleys, the length of the course of rivers, &c, during the different geological periods. I may only mention one of these, viz., the angle of inclination of the low lands and of the lands of the middle heights for which Strantz adopts for the first 5° to 10°, and the latter 10° to 20°. These values have increased always from the older times till now, a fact which shews the necessity to admit in the Primary times not only a much flatter land than now, but quite flat shores. Quite the contrary must have taken place in the chains, because the higher were not protected as now by so many mountains of secondary height; so that the angle of inclination of these last is much smaller than formerly. Generally this value rises with the smallness of the hill and diminishes with its greatness. But this value of the inclination of the plane must have diminished in the hills from the beginning till now, a fact which, on the other hand, conducts us to acknowledge that the current of water, their destructions and alluvium, must have been much greater the more we look back to these primitive times. Probably about the chalk period the beds of rivers may have become long enough to equalize the results of the greater angle of inclination with those of the shorter beds of these.
Let us try, lastly, to determine geognostically the chief places of the continents in the various geological periods, in going back from the present time to the oldest.
As the subsidences increase always in a certain arithmetical progression to the newer, and the elevations follow the same scale, it is clear that the present world must have possessed much more dry land at the beginning of things.
In the alluvial time great countries have disappeared to the NNW. and west of Europe; this we may suspect by the position of the greater parts of the low land,—by thechief subsidences in Europe and Africa,—by the destruction of part of the Tertiary beds and basins,—by many islands and many shallows of certain seas, as between Norway and Spitzbergen, in the German Sea, in the Gulf of Bevin, &c. But according to our observations they may have existed already in the old alluvial time (Proceed. Vienna Acad., January 1852). The myth of the lost Atlantis may well be a true tradition.
In North and South America similar relations indicate for the same period of time subsidences in the north-east direction for North America, and in south-east and south-west for South America. In the mean time was found in the Pacific, the great equatorial cavity in Southern Asia, especially that amongst the Indian Archipelago and east of Africa,—a subsidence in the south-east direction.
In the tertiary period numerous basins indicate many great seas which did cover the lowest parts of the earth's surface, as I have detailed it already in the Proceedings of the Vienna Acad, for 1850, pp. 96-102; and also less completely elsewhere. As these parts form the largest portions of the earth's surface, this relation alone convinces us that much dry land disappeared in later date under the sea. In the same geognostical way I have shewn the place that the sea has occupied in older periods. During the Alluvial time a good deal of land formed by Tertiary beds, Chalk, Jura beds, and even by Primary fossiliferous and crystalline rocks, subsided in the Atlantic, and in the Pacific the countries that disappeared may have belonged to the tertiary, primary, and crystalline rocks. To the south-east of Africa, fragments of land have subsided, belonging to all the four classes of formations.
In the middle and older secondary periods, it would seem that the countries lying on equatorial lines in the Pacific did replace the Australian countries, which had again subsided, as well as part of the dry land of both peninsulas in Hindustan. The secondary formations do not appear in these latter countries, because they could not be formed there. According to similar considerations, it may appear probable that a part at least of Eastern America and a part of Western Africa were again put under water by subsidences. It is possible that the rent of the Red Sea took its origin in that time, for it is surrounded by much chalk and tertiary rocks. Later, at the end of the Jura time, on the contrary, these countries must have been thrown up, and the motion must have lasted till the Alluvial time. This we prove by the chalk mountains, and the now dry tertiary basins.
In the Primary period were islands in all seas, especially distributed in an equatorial direction, because this position coincides most with the density of the centrifugal force, which had not then attained its present limits in the process of rotation.
Before we conclude, we may observe that later observations will certainly complete this essay. Through the progress of palaeontology, and natural history, zoologists and botanists have been able not only to restore and delineate to us the old fauna and flora, but they have also deciphered the philosophical plan of the origin and development of organic nature. In the same way, geology and physical geography will illustrate the once palseohydrography and orography, and follow nearly all the changes in the palaeoplastics of the earth. We shall obtain then, as complement of our actual geological maps, others for each period of time; and in the last will he indicated not only the place of the various formations, but also the values of the various elevations and subsidences. These values will consist in the indications of fh^freight, extent, and breadth, of the chains, of the angle of inclination of those as well as of the beds of rivers, the depth of the seas, the temperature of the different periods, the magnetic phenomena during these periods, and, last, the general geography of the different fossil flora and fauna. A beginning is made in this way with the Palwohydrography and Orography, but the paleeophysics are hardly studied, and even less the palaeochemistry. We have got very few notions on palfeometeorology and palseotemperature or thermies, as for instance in the changes in the isothermal lines in the geological times. The palseomagnetism, connected intimately with temperature changes, will also give rise to most interesting discoveries, and even to magnetical maps in the various geological periods. Upon palseohydrology, I may soon treat, and upon palseopotanography I have selected a few facts already. In a later paper I have shewn, by the various degrees of heat in the thermal waters, where many different vegetables and animals of higher and lower classes may have lived, and that the temperature of the sea, at the beginning, could not have been so great as philosophers thought. The maximum of that temperature could have varied only between 70° and 80° C.; but in the general one I found only about 30° or 40", like Sir H. de la Beche. The last knowledge mankind will acquire is that of Palceoastronomy; but a proper knowledge of this branch will require many centuries of time.

