
Baron Von Schlotheim has not arranged the fossils which he has described according to their geological relations, and has
only promised to do so after the completion of his appendix; I have judged it expedient to present a classification of this kind,
under the impression that it cannot but prove highly acceptable to geologists. Such an attempt may to some, at first sight,
seem unnecessary, but I am persuaded, that this idea will vanish, when they are informed, that in the work of this celebrated
naturalist, many of the localities and geological positions are erroneously indicated. These mistakes were, to a certain degree,
unavoidable, as he had not visited all the places where the different species occur, but has often been obliged to trust to his
correspondents, or even to the labels of some old collections purchased by him. Besides which, geological classification has
been variously modified, and the secondary formations better defined, since the publication of his "Petrefactenkunde.'' To
correct some of these errors, I have made use of the geological details regarding Germany which my own personal observation
and the works of others have furnished me with. In the mean time, it must be gratifying to every German to be assured, that
when Baron von Schlotheim's work shall be completed, or when he shall have figured all the species which he has described,, his
essay will be one of the finest of the kind, and will contain the fossils of every formation in Germany. In France and Italy
the labours of the geological zoologists have been almost entirely confined to the fossils of the chalk and tertiary deposits; and in England, although the field of observation has been more extended, the expensiveness of the coloured engravings renders
them, in a great measure, accessible only to the rich, which constitute the smallest portion of the scientific world. It is much
to be wished, that some person would undertake the task of establishing a correct synonymy between the German, English,
French, and Italian writers on this subject, for, at present, the science is but a mass of confusion, encumbered with double
names to designate a single object; for example, Grypcea aculeata, Scloth. is Producius aculeatus, Sow.; Gryphcea columba
Bgt. is Gryphwa spirata, Schloth.; as well as Gryphcea ratisbonensis of the same author; Gryphcea cymbium, Schloth. is Gry-
phcea arcuata, Lam. This confusion has done much to retard the progress of geology in reference to the secondary formations,
and has contributed so long to delay the acknowledgment of identity between the zechstein of Germany and the magnesian
limestone of England, of the existence of greensand and chalk in Germany, the absence of muschelkalk in England, &c.
Brongniart's visit to Baron von Schlotheim may perhaps hasten the gratification of our wishes in regard to this subject.

It may not, perhaps, be out of place to observe here, that, to complete this list of petrifactions of the different formations of Europe, it would be necessary, in the first place, to consult the general works on fossils, such as Knorr's great and fundamental work, the Encyclopedic Methodique, Burtin, Lister, the Geological Transactions, Parkinson,&c,and then to have recourse,for the different formations, in particular, to the following works: For the Transition Deposit, to Miller's Encrinites, Sowerby's Mineral Conchology, Wahlenberg's Memoir on the Orthoceratites, Brongniarfs on the Trilobites, and the Description of the Fossils of the Mountain Limestone of the United States, in Silliman's Journal. For the Coal formation, a synonymy might easily be established between the works of Schlotheim (Flora der Urwelt), Sternberg, Nau, Martius, (Memoirs of the Munich Academy), Rhode, (4 Fasciculi of Fossil Vegetables, Breslau,) and Brongniarfs Memoirs. This latter gentleman will commence, in spring, the publication of his great work on this subject, so that no department of organic remains will be so well known. For the lias and Jura limestone, Sowerby and some Parisian memoirs would, in particular, require to be examined. For the upper Jura limestone, and the chalk formation, the same authors, together with Mantell's work, Faujas on Mont St Pierre, Brongniarfs work on Paris, Desmarest's on the Crustacea, would furnish ample materials. The fossils of the plastic clay would be found in Brongniart's work on Paris, in Sowerby and Ferrussac; those of the first tertiary limestone, and the other tertiary deposits, in Lamarck, Brocchi, Brongniart on Paris and on the Vicentin, in Sowerby, in M. Deshaye's work already commenced, in Borson's Memoir on Piedmont, (Memoirs of the Turin Academy), in a work which is soon to be published by M. Basterot on the fossils of Bourdeaux and Dax, and in Fichtel's Transylvania. Lastly, Cuvier would furnish a complete list of all the animal remains of the alluvial formations; and Blainville a catalogue of the greater number of known petrified fishes.
To establish a perfect synonymy between so many authors, would be of so much advantage to geologists, that some scientific society ought to propose such an attempt as the subject of a prize.
