DEAR SIR.,—I take the liberty of sending you the chief result of my first excursion through Turkey, a country to the investigation of which I intend devoting several years. I shall start again in April, and extend my observations to Asia Minor. Possibly I may fix my quarters at Constantinople. In my next I shall mention how such a journey may be made easily and pleasantly.
  Although many countries have been lately surveyed and described, we still remain in the same ignorance as ever in regard to the natural configuration and constitution of the Turkish dominions. Christian prejudices and mercantile interests are the chief reasons for the small number of European travellers in Turkey; especially as that country now enjoys the blessings of peace, and the former fanaticism of the inhabitants has disappeared. Seeing a vast field of new facts before me, I determined to devote three or four years to its investigation, and endeavoured to associate with myself in my travels some naturalists who cultivated other branches than geology. This year I was fortunate enough to secure for a portion of my tour the assistance of two French geologists, M. Montalambert and M. Viquenel, together with a Moravian botanist, M. de Friedrichstal, and a Moravian entomologist and zoologist, M. Adolphe Schwab. These gentlemen extended their travels to the Archipelago, and so far as Syria and Egypt.
  Part 1st. Geography. » . 1
We began our tour in parts of Turkey which are almost quite unknown, but instead of impediments, we everywhere found the people obliging, often anxious to forward our enterprize, with kindness and civil treatment on the part of the Pachas or minor governors of the land, and the Christian chiefs. Prince Milosh, in particular, has every claim to our gratitude for his great politeness, and the facilities he afforded us, not only in Servia, but also in Turkey. The Sau and the Danube, Montenegro, Scutari, Pindus, Olympus, Salonichi, Philipopolis, and Widdin, form the best known limits of that part of Turkey which I travelled through. 
The geological study of Turkey is rendered extremely difficult, owing to the want of proper knowledge as to the geography of the empire. It would be necessary to construct a totally new map before one could delineate the geological features. All the best maps are crowded with false indications; I mean not only false or ill-spelled names, but ill-placed localities. Hills and even large rivers are totally omitted; whilst many parts of the maps on which hills are marked, are merely imaginary representations of the truth. All maps exhibit a central chain of great magnitude; now, in reality, we find that the Haemus Mountains or Balkans, from Sophia to the Black Sea, are in general only a range of small heights, such as, for instance, the Kahlenberg, near Vienna. It only rises to a greater elevation near Keczanlik, and continues so to Sophia. The central part of the chain may be crossed anywhere in a day, in some parts in less than a day, or even in a few hours. Between Sophia and Uskub we looked in vain for those hills, said to be so high as 9000 or. even 11,000 feet; indeed, in some places, Molasse Hills occupied the place of these pretended lofty mountains. Even the Alps of Tschardagh or the ancient Skordus, to the west of Uskub, do not attain that elevation.
  As examples of rivers omitted, I may mention the great western branch of the Ibar, S. and S. W. of Novibazar. This branch receives the Metrovitza and Semnkza, and is the true original Ibar, not the Metrovitza as it is marked on the maps. Karatova in Macedonia is placed some leagues too much to the west on a wrong river; and the river called the Egridere does not flow like the Braunitzo to Tetip, but joins the Vardar, near Banja and Hankapetan. The Karasu or Strymon runs through no lakes in the upper part of its course. It is only a very winding river with some marshes of inconsiderable extent, and some ground which, from its black colour, would seem to have been formerly of a marshy nature. However, in time of inundation, the Strymon forms here and there a broad sheet of water. Near Radomir it describes a great curve from W. to E., which is omitted in the maps. I think that all maps are very faulty in regard to the position and extent of Mcesia Superior; Sophia, in particular, seems to be too much to the east, and Radomir too much to the north-west of Dubnitza.
The road from Sophia to Nissa is imperfectly marked, which is also the case with many post-roads in Servia. The road from Seres to Dubnitza is wrong, and Libanovo is on the east, not the west bank of the Karasu. The town Tikavech does not exist in Macedonia; it is the name of a district. Negotin should be marked on the spot where Tikavech is indicated. The basin of the White Drina is ill-figured, as it is a vast plain and not a valley. The same is the case with the great Perlepe and Bitoglia tertiary basin. The Perindagh is not correctly laid down. The hilly country marked between Radomir and Scharkoe is a purely ideal representation. The sources of the eastern Morava are ill delineated.
  If I pass over the faults in nomenclature which are known to me, I may at least be allowed to express a wish, that in future maps the following names may not be marked as localities: Koliba, a single small house; Keny, or, in Servish, Celo, a village; Tschiflik, a farm; Kula, a tower; Kale, a fort; Hissar, a fortified place; Palanka, a place fortified with palisadoes; Karaul, a military post; Hammam, a bathing place (in Servish, Banjo) ; Hanor Ghan, (and not as travellers or geographers write and pronounce it, Khan) an inn ; Monastir, a convent; Grad (Servish), a large town; Varosh, a small town; Maidan, a mine, &c. All those are useful for travellers if indicated by small signs, but it is absurd to put thirty or forty times on a map,Keny, Karaul, and the like, with only some variations in the orthography, as Kei, Kioui, Koui, Karaula, Karaoul, Karakul, Kareul. The poor geographer, in compiling from the data of others, has not perceived that each traveller had his own orthography for the Kish or Servish names. It is also most singular to find upon a map marked as villages, three inns which are not far distant from each other.
Another incongruity in maps is the partial translation of the following words annexed to names: Beuk (Servish, Veliko), great; Kutjuk (Servish,Malo), small; Gorne, superior; Dolne, inferior, &c. Such words should either be entirely translated, or left in the original language, as also all the following: Dagh, Balkan, Planina, a chain of hills; Dire (Servish, Dolina), a valley or glen; Su or Sou (Servish, Voda, Rieka), a river, a torrent; Issor,a source; Bunar, a fountain or well; Keupri, a bridge (sometimes written Kopri); Derbend (sometimes wrongly written Derwend), a pass; Kapu, a door; Klissura (Servish), a pass; Demirkapu, an iron door; Eski, old; Jeni (Servish, Novo), new; Beyaz (Servish, Bjeld), white; Kara, (Servish,Cserno or Tscherno), black; Tuzlu (Servish, Slan), saltish; Egri or Eyri, bent; Potok, a small rivulet; Schuma, a forest; Mik (Wallachian), small;Mare (Wallachian), great. These words on maps have a meaning in the original language, but when translated this is not the case.
  It is also foolish to indicate the inns by their names, as these change with the proprietor for the time being; thus we have Ibrahim han,Marecastino han, he, Bimek tashi han, near Uubnicza, so named because there is before the inn a stone to assist travellers in getting on horseback.
  I think I have given hints sufficient to induce the geographer to travel over Turkey, and to make astronomical as well as geographical observations.
The Russian government is perhaps the only one which has made any attempts of this kind; but the results are still unpublished. I do not know if the Austrian government is in possession of many accurate observations, excepting some parts on the boundaries of that empire.
The principal chains of mountains in Northern and Central Turkey may be enumerated in the following order:—»
  1. The Tschardagh (Skordus of the ancients), a high and extensive chain running about north-east and south-west from the bold conical hill named Liubeten, west of Kacsanik or Katschanik, to Kalkandel (wrongly written Kalkandere on the maps), the Drinas, and the neighbourhood of Alessio or Scutari. It forms the western part of the central chain, and, when seen towards the end of June, from the tertiary plains of Albania, or the white Drina, presented the appearance of a formidable alpine range, having occasionally pointed summits, and interspersed with small fields or patches of snow, which remain even during the summer. Under the bare and pointed summits are extensive woods and pastures.
The Dryas octopetala, Silene acaulis, Narcissus poeticus, Cerastium, Myosotis, Saxtfraga, Crocus, &c. are the chief plants which are met with at the greatest elevations, some of which, as is the case with the Skordus of ancient writers, exceed 7000 feet in height; but this last, however, can be crossed in a day.
  2. The chain named by geographers Rhodope orDespotodagh, begins between Dubnicza and Dzumaa or Djumaa. This verylarge chain runs N. W. and S.E., or W. N. W. and E. S. E., diminishing always in height in an easterly direction. It traverses the Sea of Marmora at the island of that name, and continues in Asia Minor till it takes the name of Taurus. The western part of the Rhodope is the highest, and is called Riloplanina and Rilodagh, and farther to the east it takes the names of its great valleys. The name of Despotodagh (Chain of the Ecclesiastics) originated from the convents of Greek monks situated in this chain, and which formerly contained 5000 monks.
The Perin-dagh, which lies between Djumaa, Melmik, and Nerro-kup, is only a higher part of the Despotodagh, which extends south of Philippopolis. It is probable that the highest summits of these chains attain an elevation of 7000 feet. When seen from a distance, they have a bold appearance, especially on the northern side, where there are only small alluvial hills at their base ; but, on the contrary, they diminish in height as they approach the sea. These hills are much wooded in the central and higher parts, having the oak below, and the larch (Larlx europcea)? together with the fir-tree, higher up; to which succeed the alpine'pastures and the bare summits. They form, from Dubnicza to Stanimak, and thence to Seres, the central nucleus of Romelia, a very strong military position. This natural fortress can only be approached, through the defiles or passes: it still includes, as advanced stations, all the hilly country between the lower Strymon and the lower Vardar, and the great extent of wild hills in Karatova, and thus commands the important position and high-road of Egri-Palanka. It is only separated by the Vardar Valley from the chains between the Vardar, the Black Drina, and Castoria. Among these last hills may be mentioned a pretty high one, running nearly E. and W., north of Fiorina, Vodena, and Monglena, and south of Gafadartzi.
  3. The group of hills, almost unknown, which occupies a large and very wild tract of country between Ipek, Scherkoles, Triguschna, Trebigne, Zenitza, Bielopol, Plava, Klemenli, and Detschiani. Like the Rhodope, it has no general name. At Scherkoles it is called Kuriloplanina; behind Ipek Paklen it receives the name of Rosalia Planina; and at Idljb on the Ibar Stari Kolashin, that of Mokra Planina. This chain seems to run north-east and south-west, and probably attains an elevation of above 6000 feet. Nothing is known about its geography, except that it gives rise to twelve considerable rivers and to many torrents, among which are the Drina, White Drina, the Zem, the Moracca, the Drina of Bosnia, the Lini, the Vavatz, the Raschka, the Ibar, &c. This chain, like the former, is much wooded, and also contains vast pastures, with villages. In other parts it is quite uninhabited, as, for example, to the north-west of Detschiani, where there is a wood or wilderness ten leagues in extent.
  I may here mention the numerous chains of Bosnia, as it appears that several of them approached the height formerly mentioned, although none seem to equal the Dormitor, a high chain of inconsiderable extent, having the pyramidal naked form of the dolomite peaks in Southern Tyrol, and lying south-east from Mostar in the Herzegovina. Some people have called this chain Komovi, and placed it near Gusie Kasaba in Herzegovina. It attains an elevation of at least 6000 feet. Sawifraga Diapersioides is one of the characteristic plants of the higher summits near Ipek.
  4. The chain of hills next in importance is that called by the ancients Pindus, extending from Messovo to the north-west beyond the lake of Ochrida, and running north-west and southeast. Its southern extremity is connected by a somewhat lower chain with the Olympus, and separates Thessaly from Macedonia. When seen from a distance, the two chains of the Pindus and Olympus seem to form an arc of a circle, or two sides of a triangle. The height of the first chain cannot be less than 5000 feet, and some of the summits must attain a still greater elevation.
  To these may be added the Suhagor, a group of hills between Bitoglia and the lakes of Ochrida and Castoria, and also the pretty high chain south and west of Tettovo.
  Although the chains I have enumerated are under the line of perpetual snow, and without glaciers, yet snow remains during the whole year in greater or less patches. On the southern side the patches are naturally of a smaller extent, at an equal elevation, than on the north side. In European Turkey there is probably no hill which attains an elevation of 9000 feet, or perhaps even 8000 feet. All the other chains in the empire are much lower, and without snow in summer.
  5. The true Balkan, or Hcemus, is divided into Veliki Balkan or Great Balkan, between Sophia and Keczanlik, and Malo Balkan, or Little Balkan, and forms the eastern part of the central chain. If we allow S000 feet, or very little more, for the elevation of the Great Balkan, and 2000 feet, or less, for the Little Balkan, I think it will not be far from the truth. Small contreforts, or hills running parallel to each other, exist only on the northern side between Schumla and Kabrova, the declivity being more abrupt towards the south. A very low chain also extends from the Bosphorus to the north-west, separating the waters which run to the Black Sea, from those of the basin of Adrianople.
  6. A mass of rather small hills, forming the middle part of the central chain, and running, some N. and S., as near Radomir and between the basin of the white Drina and Pristina; some NW. and SE., as the Karadagh to the east of Uskub; some W.N. W. and E.S.E., as north of Kostendil, occupying the space of country between the chain which lies along the vast ancient channel of Nissa to Tchtiman, and the chains of the Tschardagh and the Ipek Mokra Planina.
Here and there prominences appear in the midst of this undulating high country or plateau. The largest and most elevated of these lie to the N.N.E. of Egri-Palanka, and probably exceed 3000 feet in absolute height. The group appears to be the Orbelus of the ancients. All the other hills of this district are often below, and seldom much above, 2000 feet. They are either partly wooded to their tops or base, particularly when they are calcareous or doleritic: some pastures occur on the highest.
The central chain of Turkey is thus composed of the Tschardagh or Skordus to the W., and the Balkans to the E.; between which we find, running from W. to E., the Karadagh, the hills about Vrana, those of Egri-Palanka, the Orbelus, the hills of Radomir and Kostendil, especially the Koniavo. We found that the name of Egri-sudagh, for the hills of Egri-Palanka, was as much unknown there, as that of Argentaro or Szrebernicza for the chain near Ipek.
  7. In southern Servia, to the north of the preceding group, are the groups of the Kopannegh, or Kopannik, and the Plocsa Hills; they form a prominent feature between the Ibar, the Toplitza and the Rachina. The hills belonging to them seem to run N.N.W. and S.S.E., and the greatest absolute height they attain is from 4000 to 5000 feet. To the east of these hills, between the great plain of Kruschevacz and the large valley of the Eastern Morava, is situated the Male-Jastrebicza-Planina, a wooded chain of considerable elevation, although lower than the last mentioned.
  All the vast forests of both chains are composed almost entirely, as in Servia, of two species of oak, Quercus Robur and Q. pedunculata; but in the Kopannegh, fir-trees occupy the highest western part. In the high meadows are found the Gentiana lutea, Pedicularis, Alchemilla vulgaris,&c., and higher up, in the bare rocky parts, the Arbutus Uva-Ursi, Gentiana acaulis, Crocus, Saxifraga diapers'wides, SEC., as on the, Ipek chain. We may regard the Temnitscha-Planina, between the Morava and Kalenska-Rieka, as a subordinate part of the Jastrebicza. It is, however, much lower, and diminishes in height towards the north, extending further north than Tagodin.
  8. Servia contains another pretty high group of hills around Szokol, on the Drina; which, along with those of the neighbouring Bosnia, probably attain an elevation of 3000 feet, and contain many beautiful pasturages. Another lower chain forms the high land of Middle Servia, running N. and S. At its commencement it is nearly covered by the tertiary and alluvial deposits, and makes its appearance at the Avala Hill, in the Kosinai Hills, the Kleschnavicza Hills, in those west of Schabari; and, finally, it forms a pretty large group, called the Hills of Rudnik (Rudnikplanina), between Kragojevacz, Rudnik, and Brusnitza. The last interesting group is the central nucleus of Servia, and a most important military position, owing to its forests and its central situation. It has served more than once as the last refuge of the Servians in their wars, and as the place from which they again commenced hostilities. The native abode of Prince Milosh is also in this district. The hills are rounded, and thickly wooded to their summits, with meadows interspersed here and there. The height of the two highest, the Great and Small Sturacz, cannot much exceed 2000 feet. To the east of the Rudnik hills a chain as high as these extends between theKopannik group and that of Szokol, forming the hills of Kosnik, the Gelin, &c.
  All the forests in Servia are composed of oaks (Quercus Robur, Q. pedunculata), amongst which are observed some ashes (Fraxinus excelsior), one species of Tilia, the Cornus mascula, a great many wild pear-trees, some apple and cherry trees, and a few hazels. But oaks and pear trees, especially in low situations, are almost the sole forest trees. This vegetation extends so far as to the south of Nissa, and into Moesia Superior; but, south of Prestina, we find the Macedonian series, consisting of the Rhamnus paliurus, the Dictamnus albus, the Salvia horminum, together with several particular species of oak and willow. In Albania many oaks and chesnut trees, as also the Acer tataricum, exist in the forests, the soil of which is dolomitic.
The Grecian vegetation, Acanthus spinosus, Colutea arborescens, &c. extends to Castoria; but, in Southern Macedonia, we find a Mediterranean vegetation,—the evergreen oak, cypress, Grenada tree, Platanus orientalis, Colutea arborescens, Cercis siliquastrum, the walnut and fig tree, &c. The olive tree is much cultivated only to the south of Salonichi in Thessaly.
  9. A most remarkable chain runs nearly north and south through Eastern Servia, between the broad and fertile valley of the Morava, and the Danube, being a continuation of the hills of the Bannat; but, from the heights of Tagodin to Sophia, the chain turns more to the east, so that the direction is nearly NW. and SE. In it is the vast channel through which the Bulgarian Morava, the Nissava, and Isker have their course. This chain is higher than the central hills of Servia, and perhaps attains, or even exceeds 3000 feet in elevation. To the north of Nissa, these hills are thickly wooded with oaks; but, further south, the limestone hills are in many places quite bare of vegetation.
  10. Lastly, In Western Turkey, viz. Western Bosnia, Herzegowina, Montenegro, and maritime Albania, there is a system of bills running like that of Dalmatia, NW. and SE.
  A prominent character of the orography of European Turkey is the presence of vast cavities or high plains at the foot of the chains, and the number of extensive cross fractures in the latter. The cavities or plains may be regarded for the most part as longitudinal valleys; and I may mention, as instances of this kind, the great valley of the Morava so far as Stolacz, and the valleys of the Nissava and Isker. A very curious and vast channel exists in Central Turkey, to the south of the central chain. It begins at the foot of the Tschardagh, or in the upper alluvial basin of the Vardar, and terminates in the Sea of Marmora, the sole interruptions it experiences being to the west of Strazin, to the east of Egri-Palanka, and the west of Somakow. There are also the upper basin of the Vardar around Kalkendel, the vast tertiary basin of Uskub, crossed by the river of that name, and those proceeding from Komanova and Karatova, a small basin to the east of Strazin, a pretty large basin from Koslendil to Dzumaa, Dubnicza, and the hills of Somakow; then the immense basin which commences at Kostanitz, contains the alluvial plains of Tartar Basardschik and Philippopolis, and extends to the tertiary basin of Adrianople, and even so far as the Sea of Marmora.
  It may be remarked, that the northern side of the Hcemus is not so near the flat land as the southern, the plain of Wallachia being separated from that chain by a series of tertiary hills, which are chiefly composed of molasse. 
  As plains, we may add to those of Philippopolis that between Keuprili and Kratovo, on the Vardar; that of Sophia, ten leagues in breadth and twenty in length; that of the Upper Strymon or of Radomir, which is smaller and irregularly triangular, but not less remarkable, for it appears to have been once the site of a large lake, and afterwards pf smaller ones, the recent disappearance of which is still shewn by the occurrence of bogs and black earth. In the upper part of the tributaries of the Ibar lies the remarkable oval plain of Kossova or Pristina, which is three leagues in breadth, and from six to ten in length. This alluvial plain, which is as flat as the hand, is only surrounded by hills of inconsiderable elevation, as it is itself on a pretty high level. To the west of these hills, and especially of the Goliesh, the White Drina forms a vast basin from Ipek to Prisrend, and farther down; though probably it does not form a direct junction with the tertiary basin of Scutari.
Farther south in Turkey, the Kutschuk Karasu constitutes a beautiful and extensive basin from Perlepe to Monastir or Bitoglia, and from Fiorina to beyond Salugiler. Lastly, I may add, the basin of the Lake of Tenidje or Tenidsche, with its partly saline or marshy soil, near Salonichi, the basin of the Seres and Drama, the alluvial plain of Kruschevatz on the Morava, &c.
  All these plains were once, like the valley of Thessaly, the sites of lakes which must have completely covered the Turkish empire. Only very few now remain, such as those of Ochrida, Castoria, Tanina, and Scutari; and even these are rapidly disappearing and being filled up: that of Castoria is said not to be deeper than fifty feet, which I can scarcely believe, but its shores are partly swampy and covered with reeds. The stream which flows from it passes through a low country. The lake of Ochrida appears to be deeper. All the lakes of Turkey are in the western or south-western part of the empire, and are chiefly surrounded by limestone hills, or they occur on the tops of hills, as in the Olympus.
Northern Turkey contains no lakes, excepting near the lowest part of the course of the Danube.
The cross fractures in the chains are for the most part at right angles to their direction; so that, in the chains running N. and S., they extend from W. to E.; and in those running W. and E., or N.W. and S. E., they extend from N. to S., or from N. E. to S. W.
Turkey affords good examples of the first kind, in the course of the Danube, between Panchova and Kladova; in the course of the Servian Morava, from Uschitze to Kruschevatz and Stolacz, and in the course of the Toplitza. Of the second kind are the upper part of the White Drina (Biela Drina)bed in the Ipek chain of hills, the course of the Black Drina (Tscharna Drina), across the Tschardagh range, particularly between Ibali and the confluence of the two Drinas; the fractures in the Tschardagh, extending from Kalkandel to Prisrend ; the course of the Kutschuk Karasu, in Bitoglia (Erigon), especially from Fiorina to where it joins the Vardar (the Axius). The course of this last river, particularly between Negotin or Gradiska, and Devrethissar; the course of the Karasu, or Strymon, which runs in true fissures between Kosnitza and the confluence of the river of Dubnitza with the Strymon, then south of Djumaa (Dzumaa), through the Kreshna Hill, then between Vistritza and Skola, north of the plain of Seres, and, lastly, west of Orphano.
The Rhodope, also, presents similar rents, running N. and S. on the Nevrekop, between that place and Kasluk. They are also observable in the course of the Karasu or Mesto, where it flows into the sea opposite the island of Tassos, and in the course of the Maritza or Hebrus from Dimotika to the sea.
  I have still to speak of the remarkable rents from N. to S., which cross the middle of the low part of the central chain, between Sophia and Uskub. These fissures are so deep, and the hilly plateau so low, in comparison to the more western and southern chains, that travellers scarcely encounter any ascent whatever, when they cross these imaginary Alps of geographers, in passing from Northern into Southern Turkey. These rents not only admit of roads for horses, but even for carriages; or, at least, they could often be made suitable for the latter with very little labour; a fact of great importance as regards geography, as well as commerce and military operations.
  In proceeding from the plains of Pristina to Uskub, we found the points from which the waters begin to flow in opposite directions, to the north and south, not on a chain of hills, or even a hillock, but on a very small plateau covered with wood and black earth, so as to give it the appearance of having once been a bog. This is in reality only a higher part of the Kossova plain, and is attained by an imperceptible ascent, so that it is probably not eighty feet above the level of the plain. It is situated between Babach and Sessnia, and is only three quarters of a league in breadth. The descent from it leads gradually through vast alluvial deposits, formed from crystalline slaty rocks, talcose gneiss, and protogine, to Kacsanik, where a deeprent, through which flows the Pepentz, conducts the astonished traveller gradually down to the tertiary basin of Uskub. This rent may be termed the Gate of Macedonia. First, There is a -picturesque defile, with perpendicular walls of old slaty and limestone rocks, so that, for the formation of the carriage road, it has been necessary to cut a very small gallery through the granular limestone and white dolonflte. Afterwards, for a league and a half, the road winds down a woody and undulating deep ravine, resembling the Pass of Killiecrankie. Lower down, there is only a small valley or glen in the crystalline slates, which varies considerably in breadth, the narrower parts being formed by the protrusion of hornblende rocks. In the course of six or seven leagues, one passes from a region where no vines grow, into a lower country, clothed with walnut-trees and excellent vineyards, and then into the warm plain of Uskub. Yet, nevertheless, I do not think I can estimate the descent from Kacsanik to Uskub at more than 500 or 600 feet.
  It appears, that between the plain of Pristina and that of Vrana, the water-shed is also formed by very low eminences. The same is the case between the basins of the White Drina and the Mitrovitza. We passed from the one to the other by an imperceptible and very slight ascent, and along a boggy smooth defile, situated to the west of Lapushnik. Even between Vrana and Komanova, the Karadagh chain presents only very low hills, with valleys which tend much to diminish the ascent. Farther to the E., N. W., N. and N. E. of Kostendil, the hills around the Radomir plain, or the Upper Strymon, are very low, as we cannot allow more than 800 feet above the level of the plain for the western hills, and 1500 or 1700 feet for those to the east, as also for the Hill of Koniavo, to the north of Kostendil.
The Kostendil basin is deeper than the Radomir plain, and is only separated from that of Dubnicza by hills whose elevation is generally under 1000 feet; and from that of Sophia by the Wistoska, a hill whose absolute elevation may be estimated at about 2500 feet.
This inconsiderable height of the Radomir Hills, in conjunction with the valleys or glens, facilitates very much the passage from Kostendel, Dubnicza or Radomir, into the Morawa basin. To the south, between Dubnicza and Radomir, it is only necessary to cross a small molasse hill not exceeding 300 feet in height, or we may even go round this hill if we avoid Pobovnol and Tedno, and in that case the carriage road only crosses a small sienite elevation at Dubnicza, and an insignificant smooth tertiary hill to the east of Tedno. To the north of Radomir, on ascending by a scarcely perceptible acclivity, first the smooth valley of the winding Strymon, and then the Gerleskarieka, one arrives at Gcrlo (Grlo) almost without being aware of the ascent. At this place a small molasse ridge is crossed, without ascent, by means of a deep defile or rent, running E. and W. and a quarter of a league in length, and after ascending a very little, still on molasse, the point is attained where the water begins to flow to the north. A gradually inclined plane leads through pretty deep cross valleys to Scharkoe or Pirot, in the great valley of the Nissava.
The valleys which form this small inclined plane are Novocelskorieka, running chiefly N.E. and S.W., Nevljanskarieka, running N. and S. and also sometimes E. and W., Lakanitschkarieka, running N.E. and S.W., and Sukova, running E. and YV. By means of these it is possible to penetrate from the north into central Turkey with still greater ease than by Kacsanik or Vrana, for carriages may be made use of along the whole line; and from Scharkoe to Belgrade there are only two hills of small extent, on which the passage of large carriages would be somewhat difficult, or which would require some previous preparation, viz. at one league north of Scharkoe, and at two leagues S.E. of Nissa (pronounced Nischa) between Banja and Topolnitzarieka.
Lastly, a very low pass, to the south of Tchtiman at Porta Trajana, separates the plain of Sophia from that of Tatar Basardschik. The plain of Sophia is to be regarded as an upper subordinate portion of the great basin of Bulgaria and Wallachia, with which it is connected by the Iskar Valley, a cross fracture, as also by the bed of the Uraha or Wid.








THE crystalline slaty rocks occupy an immense tract of country in European Turkey, as they form the following chains, viz. the great ranges of the Tschardagh and Despotodagh ; the Perindagh, with the chains north of Seres, and east of Istip; those of the Chaladian promontory; those between the Kutschuk Karasu or Perlepe-Bitoglia basin, and the lakes of Ochrida and Castoria; the Pindus; the Olympus; in Servia, the Jastrebacz, the Temnitscha-Planina, and the western borders of the Morava valley higher than Tagodin ; and in Wallachia the chain separating that country from Transylvania and the Bannat. These rocks also, chiefly under the form of mica or talc slates, occupy considerable tracts between the Timok valleys and the defile of the Danube; then west of the Pristina plain; around Kacsanik; in the Karadagh; around EgriPalanka; between fhat town and Karatova; south of Kostendil; in the hills between the basin of Bitoglia and the Tscherna; and, lastly, at Kezanlik in the Haemus, and probably farther to the east on the southern side of that chain.
Those primary rocks, called by some authors transition rocks (see my Guide du Geologue Voyageur), occupy still greater space in European Turkey than the crystalline slates, so that the Turkish peninsula is, like the Iberic one, chiefly composed of old formations, and may be described as a group of very ancient islands. Among the transition rocks, there are two sets which it is not always easy to distinguish; the one older, and composed of slates with quartzose rocks, some micaceous, talcose, and arenaceous rocks, and a few compact or semi-granular limestone beds; the other newer, and composed of greywacke, greywacke-slate, sandstone, conglomerate slate, and limestone in the compact state, and more fossiliferous.
This last formation constitutes the whole mass of hills in central Servia north of the Servian Morava, as also the Gelin, the Kosnik hills, the Kopaunik group, a part of the Novibazar district in Bosnia; the hill Vrenie between Novibazar and the Ibar; a part of the hilly district to the east of the basin of Pristina; and, lastly, it appears in the Balkans. The other, or older transition rocks, are to be found in the north-west portion of Servia; in the hills of Goliesh between the Mitrovitza and the White Drina (the Goliesh); in the district of Kolaschin, near Pristina; in some parts of Moesia Superior; in the hills west of Gafadartzi in Macedonia; and probably also in the Balkans.
These last rocks, having only experienced some slight igneous changes in the neighbourhood of plutonic masses, establish a kind of transition from the true recent greywacke to the talcose and micaceous crystalline slates like those of the Tschardagh. In the subordinate limestone beds I found only encrinites and indistinct polypiers, as at Rabocsevo, south of Belgrade; yet the limestone masses are sometimes very large, as on the road from Uskub to Kalkandel, or on the road between Gafadartzi and Perlepe. Three or four leagues from Gafadartzi, a blackish or greyish compact limestone forms a smallchain running N.—S. (thebeds running N.—S. anddipping at a high angle to the E.), and crossed by a deep fissure from E. to W. At Uskub there is a greyish compact limestone; and at the distance of four leagues from that city the road to Kalkande passes through a defile, running E.—W., and situated in a small granular whitish limestone. This reminds one of the geology of Greece.
  On the Nevljanska-Rieka, between Radomir and Scharkoe, I also observed masses of what I should be inclined to consider as the same limestone and slate; but the vicinity of secondary limestone seems to make it sometimes as difficult there, as in S.E. Carinthia and Carniola, to classify with precision all the limestone masses the traveller may meet with. One might perhaps also unite with these the compact limestone associated with slate and quartzose conglomerate, in the Kosnai hills in northern Servia; and that of the Maidan-pek district, which is traversed and altered by sienite and sienitic-porphyry dykes, were it not that these slates, &c., like the same rocks in the Bannat, have too much of a crystalline, slaty, and talcose structure.
These deposits possibly correspond with some of the oldest members of Murchison's silurian system. The greywacke formation (classed by me among the newer primary rocks) occasionally contains a Umestone filled with petrifactions, and is probably of the same age as the rocks of the Eifel. The greywacke is, like that of the Harz and the South of Scotland, composedhof a basis of clay-slate, which includes fragments of clay-slate and quartz and scales of mica. A good example of its limestone is found at Divostin, and in the valley S.W. from the convent of Vratschka (Vracsa), 2^ leagues from Kragojevacz in Servia. Its colours are grey, blue, red,'and brown, and it contains encrinites, caryophylleae, astreae, fungites, and other kinds of polypiers or corals, as well as some indistinct bivalves, a turritella, and a small patella, or a univalve of some genus of Lamarck bordering on the patella. M. Viquenel found an echinoderme in the limestone slate. At Kosnik, in S. W. Servia, the same limestone presents itself, with many madreporic-like fossils and encrinites. The greywacke also includes some limestone breccia, as near the convent of Vratschefnitza at the eastern end of the Rudnik Hills, and near Verbovnitz not far from Dubnicza.
  I am inclined to regard those old and new primary deposits as the masses which, for the most part, have been altered by subterranean heat and plutonic agency, so as to give rise to the greatest portion of the crystalline slaty rocks of Turkey. In the first place, it is a remarkable fact, that all those last contain limestone beds, generally of a granular texture, or in the form of dolomites; and, even as in Greece, these nodular shaped masses are of considerable extent; as, for instance, in the Karschiaka hill, near Uskub, between that city and Kalkandel, and along the whole range of hills between Trojak and Perlepe. Now, in this last range, a beautiful white dolomite, forming the hill of Kosak and other eminences, is contained in a green talcose mica-slate, with a slight admixture of felspar, and this St Gothard-like dolomite is in intimate connection with other similar masses of blackish or whitish compact or semigranular limestone, which are associated with clay-slate to the east and west of this dolomitic deposit. The greatest plutonic action has been upon this last and the neighbouring slates.
  In the Tschardagh range the same thing is observed. Vast masses of argillaceous slates, as well as chloritic or talcose rocks more or less decomposed, and even sometimes altered and discoloured by acid vapours, or mixed up with ferruginous matter, envelope or include bed-like ovoidal masses of limestone, which is partly granular, partly compact. These last seem to form the summits of many hills, as the Kobelitza near Kalkandel, and present the greatest analogy with the position of many of the limestones of the Pyrenees. I have no doubt that future observers may find in these limestones, in the vicinity of erupted masses, some crystallized minerals like those of the Pyrenees. The quartzose conglomerates have been occasionally changed into quartzite, and those chloritic or talcose rocks, which contain little quartz, have been converted into varieties of talcose gneiss, or at least something resembling it.
  In the Karadagh and the hills of Kacsanik, some cipolin or micaceous limestone beds, are to be seen; and we have already mentioned the occurrence of a great mass or bed of white granular limestone and dolomite in micaceous slates, quartzites, and clay-slates at Kacsanik.
Granular limestone also occurs in the more altered primary rocks; those which have been converted into gneiss and micaceous and felspathic slates: for instance, between Tagodin or Stiple and Kukurovacz or Kragojevacz, in the Perin-dagh south of Djumaa, or more properly above Siribin, in the Riloplanina, a quarter of a league, and three-fourths of a league to the east of the large and beautiful convent of Rilo. Crystallized minerals occur in most of these limestones; the plutonic action having been complete, varieties of hornblende and augite, tremolite, actiftolite, green augite, garnet, idocrase, &c., have been produced, as I shall afterwards mention more fully in speaking of the granites.
Turkey lies in the Mediterranean zone of Europe, so that we could not expect to find there either the old coal deposit, or the secondary series of rocks which characterize the middle and N. W. part of Europe. Indeed, I only found my great alpine and Mediterranean reddish arenaceous andcalcareous formation. The rocks consist of reddish or greyish, very micaceous slates, sandstones like many of the trias, some conglomerates chiefly of the quartzose kind, rarely with fragments of slates or older rocks, and compact or somewhat fetid limestone, which occurs in three or four thick beds. I had occasion to observe this formation on both sides of that vast dos d'dne, formed by central Servia, Moesia Superior, and central Macedonia; but I could not discover any fossils in it. Between Novibazar and Ipek, after having passed the clay-slates of Vrenie, in the upper part of the Ibar and Kolaschin, we begin to find quartzose conglomerate, and reddish or arenaceous slate, between Kaludra, Meleja, and Petzkij. At last, before commencing the descent of the plain of the White Drina, the slate is distinctly seen covered by compact limestone, then by quartzose conglomerate, and afterwards by an immense deposit of compact limestone, which constitutes the Kurilo-planina above Scherkoles and to the east of the plain of the White Drina, as also the high picturesque hills above Shetskevok and the high summits to the east of Breniatz ; in short, the greatest part of the group of hills N. and W. of Ipek. The alternation of this limestone with conglomerate, reminded me of a similar one in the valley of the Enns near Lientz in Upper Styria.
  At Castoria, subordinate to a vast deposite of greyish compact or semi-crystalline and dolomitic limestone, there occurs an alternation of greyish-black and reddish slates, with quartzose conglomerates. I do not know if these arenaceous rocks are to be referred to our old secondary formation, as they seemed to me to be more connected with the greywacke. They form the northern side of the lake of Castoria, as well as the neck of the peninsula on which that town is beautifully situated.
  In south-eastern Servia, and the district of Nissa, my " reddish old secondary formation1' is best exposed: it extends from Banja some leagues in a northerly direction, forming the lowest part of all the hills on the eastern side of the Nissa basin. Thence it is known to extend at least as far north as the Slatova hill on the Ressava, but it is only visible occasionally, as between Krivivir and the convent called Svetapetka, where it forms a plateau,covered with a thick forest. In other places it is concealed by the alluvial soil, or the secondary limestone. I also found it in the Bannat on the Danube, extending to Steuerdorf, near Oravitza; but there it is associated with true todtliegendes, quartziferous porphyry (Islas), and even with an old coaly deposite, which furnishes an excellent caking coal at Steuerdorf.
The superposition of secondary limestone on my radish old secondary formation is best seen at 2| leagues east of Nissa, on the ascent of a hill over which the road to Sophia passes, and where there are two Karaul, or stations for gens darmes. The beds incline to the E. and S.E. at an angle of 45°, and dip under the compact limestone, which forms the upper parts of some hills in the vicinity. Two beds of compact fetid limestone occur in the lower part of this series of slaty and quartzose sandstones, some of which are not unlike the trias rocks of Germany.
The lias and Jurassic limestones are represented in Turkey only by a great deposit of compact whitish, greyish, yellowish, and reddish limestone, as is the case in the whole Mediterranean zone of Europe: the best examples which occur to me, are those on the road from Sophia to Tagodin. This formation constitutes the whole of that vast and singular cavity through which flow the Nissava, and its tributaries the Sukava, the Nevljanska-rieka, the Lukanitschka-rieka, &c. 1^ also forms the hills separating that part of the Morava valley between Nissa and Kopri from the valley of the Timok, particularly the Rtan, three leagues to the north of the Servish Banja. Farther north it forms the great Omelijska-Planina, and bounds the tertiary molasse of Timok and its tributary torrents to the east, as well as to the west and south, by forming the Vratarnicza-Planina, which extends to the pass of the same name on the north of Gorguschevatz.
  In these countries, the limestone does not vary much in its texture or colour, which is chiefly greyish or whitish, seldom reddish or yellowish, but it exhibits some variety in its fossils. Sometimes it is distinctly oolitic. Although the compactness of the rock often prevents the organic remains being visible, yet, at other times, indistinct traces of them are very common, and in particular beds the fossils are well preserved, but difficult to extract from the rock. Two leagues south of Scharkoe, on the Sukava, the whitish limestone is full of encrinites, and bivalve and univalve shells in fragments: this rock is probably only a prolongation of the beds observed to the south, alternating with some slaty rocks upon the Lukanitscha-rieka and Nevljanska-rieka. The position of these last limestone rocks is rather doubtful: they are sometimes oolitic, and full of encrinites, various corallines, terebratulae, &c. Some spots seem to be still more rich in fossils. In crossing from Nissa to Gorguschevatz, I observed between the inn of Male Timok and the highest part of the plateau to be crossed to the north, that the limestone contained so many Encrinites, as well as the Ostreacristata, and species of Astrea, Cariophyllia, Cardium, Trochus, Echinoderm.es, &c. that it was not unlike some of the rocks belonging to the coral rag. I searched in vain for belemnites; but I hope to be able next year to make a more extensive collection of Turkish Jurassic fossils.
  In Western Turkey the whole group of hills between Bosnia, Novibazar, Ipek, and Montenegro is calcareous, and composed of a limestone which is greyish or whitish, seldom reddish, and much like that of the secondary Alps. Some marly slates are interstratified here and there; but I have not heard of gypsum or salt being found in it. Fossils seem very rare; yet in ascending from Ipek the Peklen hill, we meet at no great height a bed full of a species of Isocardia not unlike my /. Caruinthiaca (See Mem. de la Soc. Geol. de France, vol. 2, part 1,
  . 47). It is most probable that this formation extends far into Bosnia, forming, in particular, the chains between the Bosna and the Verbas; as it makes its appearance in Croatia, and as the chains have all the same direction N. W.—S. E., it must cross the whole of Bosnia. It is even possible that the Szokol plumbiferous limestone in Western Servia, if it be not a transition rock, may also belong to this extensive formation.
  In South-western Macedonia there are a great number of chains of compact limestone, which may also possibly belong to the secondary rocks; as around Castoria, between Castoria and the Pindus, to the south of Castoria, between Fiorina, Vodena, and Sarigol, and probably still more to the south in Southern Albania. In Turkey, as in Carniola and Southern Styria, the vicinity of primary (transition) rocks to great limestone masses, as well as also to the Jurassic limestone, renders it difficult to distinguish between them, and for that reason I am unwilling to assign a precise age to those compact limestones. I observed them west of Radomir, in the Wistoka hill, westof Sophia, in the Koniavo hill north of Kostendil, in a hillock isolated in the midst of tertiary molasse between Kosnitza and the Dubnicza vineyards, as also near Niemele on the road from Gerlo to Scharkoe. In this latter place, as well as in the Upper Nevljanska-rieka, the limestone is associated with slates resembling greywacke or even clay-slates, as also with arenaceous slates of a greyish or reddish colour, and sandstones. These limestones,like the Jurassic, occasionally form singularly shaped hills and small defiles, and contain caverns. Small caverns are also to be seen between Sophia and Nissa; and in the Ipek chain in Albania, large bodies of water sometimes issue out of the caverns.
The great chalk formation of Southern Europe is also found in Turkey ; it is already known that the hippurite and nummulite limestone, together with compact limestone, as also dolomite, and sandstone or marls, constitute, not only Dalmatia, but also a considerable portion of Western Bosnia, Montenegro, and Western Albania. We saw this formation extending from the Scutari hills to the middle of the White Drina basin near Drsenik, and thence to the east as far as Iglareva, forming small plateaus covered with oaks, or as barren as those of Dalmatia and Istria.
  In the very ancient basin of Novibazar, we meet with a vast deposit of greyish marly sandstones with coaly fragments of vegetables, and interstratified with grey marls more or less indurated. It appeared to us that these slightly inclined masses, situated to the N. and N.W. of Novibazar, belonged to the lower cretaceous formation or green sand, and were distinct from the transition-slates and greywackes of the lower part of the Raschka and Ibar. We were confirmed in this idea by the discovery made at Mekinie, one and a-half leagues S. W. of Novibazar, of hippurite limestone with a great many cll-preserved hippurites, chiefly of two species, (H. cornu pastoris, H. vaccinum), identical with those found in the Alps of Salzburg. It appears difficult to account for the presence of this deposit at Novibazar, otherwise than by considering it as a local one overlying older formations; for, as the surrounding hills are very high, I cannot see how it could extend thence into Western Bosnia.
  In crossing rapidly the limestone hills between Kalguilar and Telovo, in Southern Macedonia, I found limestone rocks with various coralline bodies, which I thought might be hippuritic limestone. A league to the west of lake Telovo, I met with calcareous conglomerate, and black slaty fetid marls like those of the lowest cretaceous system. But as my journey was unfortunately too rapid, I only give this as an indication for future travellers, and shall pay it proper attention on a later occasion.
For the same reason, I shall not assign an age to the secondary dolomite and compact limestone between Kalgiular and Ostrovo, and at Kosele. Near Belgrade, 1£ leagues from that city at the entry of the valley of Toprad, I found a patch of compact hippurite limestone, with smooth and striated terebratulae, encrinites, and polypiers; but here the hippurites were broken, and not in their original situation as at Novibazar. This small deposit, together with some similar ones in Southern Styria and Carinthia, leads to the presumption that Hungary, perhaps even Sclavonia and northern Bosnia, may contain some of the same kind. Indeed, it would be remarkable if, in Hungary, a country containing so much cretaceous nummulitic limestone, as in the Bakonywald and near Pest, hippurites should be entirely awanting. I also saw in Belgrade a reddish coarse marble like the Italian Scaglia, and the well-known marble of Dotis in Hungary. I was told that it came from Eastern Servia,—Can it also be a chalky rock?
Next year I shall visit the secondary limestones of Gallipoli and the Dardanelles, the age of which my travelling companions have perhaps already determined.
  A very large portion of European Turkey consists of the tertiary serie?. The greatest basin is that of Wallachia and Bulgaria, which is filled up with marls partly saliferous (slatina), molasse sands, and some limestones with shells. In lower Bulgaria and the Dobrutscha, a vast deposit of this kind seems to predominate, which in many places renders the country hilly to the banks of the Danube. This formation extends to all the great annexed basins, as those of the Wid, the Isker, the Timok, &c. In this last I found, near Gorguschevatz, argillaceous marls with bivalve shells, as also inclined molasse beds. Tertiary shelly limestone occurs near Negotin.
  I was very anxious to determine if the tertiary sea had extended from the Bulgarian basin to that of Servia. The most likely place I could find for this supposed connection, is between Nissa and Gorguschevatz, being the lowest part of the chain from the Danube to Sophia. Indeed to the N. E. of Nissa, the limits of both basins come very near each other for some miles. Yet I could not find the molasse beds extending from one side of the secondary limestone ridge to the other, although the sandstones were to be seen at a slight elevation below the low pass at Grenada. Farther to the north I twice crossed the chain, but found an ancient communication to have been quite impossible, the ridges of secondary limestone being too high. I therefore conclude, that, if no connexion existed, the Servian Sea was separated from the Bulgarian one, only by a very small ridge in the neighbourhood of Nissa.
The basin of Sophia is another great subordinate portion of the Bulgarian-Wallachian tertiary basin, and was only separated by a pretty narrow ridge of limestone and other old rocks from the great tertiary basins of Kostendil and Dubnicza, and TatarBasardschik. Alluvium forms its bottom, and molasse with bituminous wood is found in it.
  The greatest part of Servia north of the Morava is tertiary, the country consisting of small, smooth, wooded hillocks, and fertile valleys or plains near the Danube. The primary rocks (transition of authors) are only seen in the highest hills. We can distinguish the tertiary formation of Servia in the following localities, viz. the lowest region of the Drina, the great tertiary gulf of the Kolubara, Lipla, and Turia; the other gulf of the Morava from Saemendria to Stolacy, and extending far to the west in the direction of the Tessawa, Limovaty, river of Kragojevacz, Levazna, and Kalenska-rieka, as also to the east by the Pek, the Mlava, Ressawa, and Ravenatz. All these gulfs were once parts of the great Hungarian tertiary sea, in which there appeared as southern promontories, the hills between Maidan-Pek and Ressawa, the Avala hills, with the Kosinai and Palkovitz, &c. To the south, the Morava is separated only by a short defile of a league in length, cut in gneiss between Stolacz and Jassica, from the somewhat higher alluvial and tertiary basin or plain of Kruschevatz. This last extends to Tschatschak, but diminishes considerably in breadth. It is also connected with a still higher basin, that of the Raschina, which is pretty extensive, and filled up chiefly with marls and calcareous rocks, with or without fresh-water shells and lacustrine deposits, as at Osretze, Riberia, and Bruss. At Bobota we observed impressions of plants in the marls. This deposit overlies greywacke.
Another considerable basin, also higher than that of the Morava, extends from Turkish Banja, near Nissa, to Bulovan, and along a part of the course of the Morava and Toplitza. South of Nissa it is alluvial as well as tertiary, having marls and molasse with sands above, and lastly alluvial loam or loss. The Nissava cavity, with its two natural dykes, the one south of Banja, the other 1^ league north of Scharkoe, is only filled up with alluvial matter. At Mustapha-Palanka it forms a vast triangular plain.
s 2
The composition of the northern Servian tertiary basin is •identical with that of Southern Hungary and the Bannat. The inferior rocks are argillaceous marls, or molasse with sandy marls, then sands and sandy marls, with some conglomerate and calcareous beds containing fossils, such as Cerithium, Cardium, Venus, Concheria, Trochus, &c. I may mention as examples, the sections at Vischnitza, Grotzka, E. and S. of Belgrade, Rakovitza, Raila, Schabari, Kragojevacz. Coralline limestones, like those of Syrmia and the Leithagebirge near Vienna, are also to be met with, particularly in those parts bordering on the Danube, as at Vischnitza, Belgrade, and south of Sau. In the upper part of the basins, where the influx of fresh water must have been greater than elsewhere, one sometimes observes whitish or greyish marls containing Cypris, Planorbis, Paludina, Lymnea, andConcheria (C. spathulata), as at Relnitza, and on the shores of the Mutnitschka-rieka, near the monastery of Svetapetka, W. of Parakin-Palanka. To the SW. of Kragojevacz I also found marls with Cypris, and in the sandy marl a whitish coarse limestone, with many impressions of the Concheriatriangularis (Partsch). Lignites are met-with near Semendria and Miliova, at which latter place Planorbes occur.
The Kossova-Pristina basin is situated pretty high, and is evidently the site of an old lake, of which the bottom is now alluvial, and the sides are covered here and there with marls and a conglomerate having a calcareous cement like that of many fresh-water limestones.
The Kostendil, Dubnicza, Radomir, and Dzumaa basins contain only molasse and marls. These arenaceous rocks form considerable ridges between Dubnicza and the Radomir and Kostendil plains. One of the ridges between Kosnitza and Verbonitz surrounds or covers old compact limestone hills, and the Strymon flows through a rent running N—S. in this molasse, from Kosnitza to the confluence of the Dubnicza river with the Strymon.
The molasse is inclined to the S.E., and some coarse conglomerates are seen on the sienitic rocks near Kosnitza, and between that place and Shetirtza. These last are partly horizontal. In the middle part of that basin I found, north of Pobovdol, three thick beds of bituminous wood, interstratified with the marly sandstones which are there of a granitic appearance, and somewhat resemble the granite of Kostendil and Rilo. Dicotyledonous wood and some boggy gramineous plants are found in it. One peculiarity of this molasse is, that it reaches to considerable heights. M. Viquenel found it at the top of the Koniavo hill N. of Kostendil, and I saw it forming the hills N. of Pobovdol, then those to the E., NW., and W. of Dubnicza, and extending to the vicinity pf Dzumaa. We cannot say if the elevation, which amounts to from 1500 to 2000 feet, is the original one, or whether the deposits were elevated at the epoch of the appearance of the neighbouring trachytes.
The fact is, that varieties of molasse or tertiary marls are associated at a high level with trachytic conglomerates, between the plain of Kostendil and the valley of the Egredere.
Marls are very abundant near Dubnicza, where they form the soil of beautiful vineyards. In the basin of Radomir there are calcareous conglomerates and travertines, with some lacustrine limestone, including Helices and Planorbes, as around the town of Radomir. I consider these to have been deposited from a mineral spring which formerly issued from the adjacent limestone hill. This hill still affords large springs of excellent fresh water. Alluvial loam or loss also occurs there in thehollows, and on the banks of the Strymon.
  In the basin of Dubnicza the alluvial deposits acquire a great thickness and height; they envelope the ridges of limestone north of Dubnicza and Kostendil, and extend all along the base of the crystalline schistose Rilo-Planina, as also along the Perin-Dagh. A small platform is thus formed all round the northern and western part of the Rilo-Planina and Eastern Karatova hills. This old alluvial formation is merely the result of the continued erosive action which took place at the end of the tertiary epoch; for, at the entrance of the principal longitudi• nal valleys of the Rilo-Planina, we find, behind the village of Rilo, a very thick mass of recent tertiary conglomerate in horizontal beds, and attaining an elevation of at least 100 feet above the torrent of the defile.
Lastly, this basin contains the vast level alluvial plains of Radomir and Kostendil, and it must have been separated from that of Sophia only by a very small stripe of land during the tertiary epoch.
The great Vardar tertiary basin extends from W. of Uskub to Negotin, Istip, Komanova, and the valley of Shinnie (to the E. of the last town), and includes small patches of rocks along the Pepentz to 1^ leagues S. of Kacsanik. Marls, molasse, quartzose micaceous sand, and sandstones, are the chief constituent parts of its deposits; but the molasse with some conglomerate predominates. On the Pepentz we saw, reposing on mica slate, a patch of tertiary argillaceous marl, with traces of lignite and impressions of leaves of trees; it was in beds dipping to the N.E. under an angle of 45°, this high inclination being owing to some accidental cause. Near Nagoritsch and Vinitza, sand and sandstones are also inclined to the W. at an angle of 15°; but here the vicinity of doleritic rocks fully accounts for this position, which is also observable farther to the E. of Vinitza in sandstones and limestone conglomeratss, which dip to the E. under an angle of 20°. Near Uskub at the Karschiaka hill, there is a calcareous conglomerate having an inclination of from 20° to SS°.
  In the southern part of the basin, the molasse often forms a very hilly country, as between Pepelischta and Istip, where red marls, along with calcareous marls and some conglomerates, are seen amongst these rocks, always without fossils as elsewhere. Deposits, apparently of fresh water origin, occasionally occur in the mavis. We likewise observed between Gigantitz and Istip, and at that last town, the molasse associated, as in S.W. France, along the Lot, with whitish or reddish compact calcareous marls, sometimes having a concretionary or pisolitic structure. At Istip these beds have an inclination of from 5° to 10°; this inclination is also seen at other places, as they cover a very undulating surface of older sienitic or primary crystalline rocks.
The Vardar at Negotin is surrounded by horizontal beds of calcareous marls, with many impressions of aquatic marshy plants. It appeared to me that these rocks were subordinate to the molasse formation which constitutes a portion of the base of the hills on the right bank of the Vardar; indeed, we found molasse on the road from Gafadartzi to Perlepe, between Vosage and Trojak, where it, in conjunction with conglomerate, forms pretty considerable heights, some of which are upwards of 1000 feet. The molasse also forms the Col, which it is necessary to pass before descending into the Trojak basin; and it is covered with freshwater limestone, which forms a thick deposit throughout the whole extent of that picturesque and wild valley. The inferior part of the valley is completely filled up with this limestone, and a stream of water has cut a deep bed for itself in it. This basin does not seem to have communicated with that of Perlepe and Bitoglia, for the defile between the basins, which is of considerable height, contains no tertiary rocks, and tertiary conglomerate is only found on the descent to Perlepe.
The same freshwater limestone deposit is seen at Vosage, and on the small hill W. and S.W. of Gafadartzi, in some places overlying greyish tertiary marl. We had also occasion to observe it in the form of travertine, and associated with calcareous conglomerate, at a pretty large hill near the beautiful dolomitic rocks to the W. of Uskub on the road to Kalkandel. Lacustrine limestone, containing planorbes and other shells, also occurs near Komanova, and I saw patches of travertine at Aratschina (1^ leagues E. of Uskub). This country, as well as the base of the Karadagh, is skirted by a range of small hills composed of greyish tertiary marls, and tertiary conglomerate with fragments of slate, jasper, quartz, &c., in beds inclined at an angle of 20° or 30°; the same rocks, however, are nearly horizontal at Istip on the banks of the Vardar.
The Vardar basin contains a vast quantity of old alluvium, which forms the plain S. of Uskub, and also the upper Vardar basin to the E. and W. of Kalkandel. Some calcareous pudding-stones belong to this epoch, as those on the old limestone hills of Dobrotan, those to the S. of Kalkandel, and 1| leagues from Kacsanik on the Pepentz.
The beautiful basin of Perlepe and Bitoglia has, likewise, along the base of the hills which border it, deposits of molasse and marls, with a rich vegetable soil of lacustrine origin. Old alluvial conglomerates are occasionally met with, as, for instance, between Sarigol and Kalguilar. Similar deposits exist around the lake of Telovo and below Vodena. Moreover, from Telovo to within half a league S. of Vodena, the valley is completely incrusted with a very thick deposit of travertine. This rock presents itself in all possible forms, as calcareous tufa, pulverulent matter, calc-sinter, and freshwater limestone, which is either compact or concretionary. Its beds are very irregular. Two very thick masses occur, the one under the village of Telovo, the other below Vodena, which are easily accounted for, on the supposition that the river Telovo formerly fell in the form of cascades at those places, nearly in the same way as it does at present. At Telovo the cascades are three in number, and the height of the highest is at least fifty feet. At Vodena, immediately below the town, there is a double set of cascades; the first set, consisting of five, falls down a height of from seventy to eighty feet; the second set is less high but broader. Nothing in all Macedonia is more beautiful than these cascades; and we may here mention that they have been figured by Cousinery. The white stream of water, surrounded by a most luxuriant Mediterranean vegetation, the large Platanusorientalis, Cercis siliquastrum, immense fig-trees, mulberry, almond, pomegranate, and peach trees, remind one of Tivoli, near Rome; but I think the scenery at Vodena is finer and on a larger scale.
The bottom of the Vistritza and lower Vardar basin is also tertiary; and the argillaceous soil or loss is impregnated with nitre and covered with marshes. The village of Allah-Kilissia, which is nearly on the site of the ancient Pella, is built on a pretty large smooth hill extending N.—S., and composed of calcareous conglomerate, travertine, and lacustrine limestone; this last has probably been deposited by a mineral spring, as we still find a most abundant spring of excellent water taking its rise from the hill, and making its appearance in the middle of the sterile plain which surrounds it. The interior of a ruined edifice, probably a temple, serves as a reservoir for the water ; and six beautiful and very large palms afford shade to the traveller who comes thither to refresh himself.
The Seres basin has nearly a similar constitution with the last, and contains a vast deposit of travertine at the entrance of the first defile of the Strymon (N. of Seres), near Skala. It is a porous rock, which seems to have been deposited by streams of acidulated water flowing down the hills for a succession of ages. The soil of the Seres basin contains much nitre in many places.
  I had also occasion to examine some molasse deposits near Karatova to the N.W. of that city, and I travelled through the molasse basin ofMelnikand Libanovo. Small hills of molasse and alluvial matter extend along the Strymon valley, at some distance from the river, particularly in an easterly direction. They commence at Vistritza and finish at Schenadidere. Libanovo, on the left bank of the Strymon (and not on the right as indicated in maps), is situated in a basin of molasse and greyish marls. To the S. of the inn called Marecastino-han, there are very good sections of the quartzose tertiary sands, sandstones and conglomerates, all lying in horizontal beds, and without fossils. Old alluvial granitic masses are accumulated, forming pretty high ridges along the last contreforts of the Perin-Dagh and the Kreshna hill, as S. of Schenadidere. Some small blocks of granite and granular limestone are occasionally seen in the beds of the torrents; but the great phenomenon of dispersed erratic blocks seems to be foreign to Central Turkey. A very small basin of molasse, dipping to the E. at an angle of 15°, along with alluvium, exists around Sirbin, between the Kreshna hill and the pass of Dzumaa.
  I have now to mention the White Drina tertiary basin in Albania, which appears to be similarly constituted with the Hungarian and Austrian basins ; having marls below, and some fossils in the upper sandy parts; as at Drsenik, where there is a mixture of freshwater and saltwater shells, consisting of Congeria triangularis (Partsch), a large Paludina with marked ridges on the spire, a Buccinum (B. baccatum), found in Austria and at Bordeaux. Above these marls occur sand and sandstones, with superimposed beds of greyish yellow marl, and freshwater limestone with Planorbis, Paludina, Lymnea, and Physa, as we observed at the foot of the hills of the Kuriloplanina E. of Schkerkoles. In short, this basin, as well as that of Scutari, would probably furnish fossils to the amateur of paleontology,
The Haliacmon or Ncvditza and Karasu basin in Southern Macedonia, is probably similar to the Vardar basin. On the other side of the Olympus is the Thessalian tertiary basin. Lastly, the great tertiary basin ofddrianople seems to be connected with that vast extent of high land which forms the central part of Asia Minor between the Taurus to the S., and the group of hills between Amastrah and Bafra, to the N. Major Hauslab is right in the idea which he has formed of the course of the rivers, and the position of the salt lakes. Trachytic and other igneous eruptions occur in this basin, particularly on the Bosphorus and in Asia Minor.




