I.—ON ALLUVIAL ROCKS. 
1. Old Alluvium, syn. Diluvium.
THIS series of alluvial deposits, in the regular succession, immediately follows the newest tertiary rocks. We do not believe that it is always distinctly separated from the modern alluvium, although Cuvier, Professor Buckland and others, maintain that such is the case. When a distinct separation takes place, it only occurs accidentally here and there. On the contrary, there is in general a transition from the one to the other, as in all the preceding formations; so that the two would seem to be nothing else than the product of the same and still existing causes, although the effects of these causes would appear to have diminished from the older to the more recent epochs. When both alluvia are well separated, it indicates that the causes to which the old alluvium has owed its existence had suddenly ceased to operate. Thus, in a great basin, it would be thought that the water has rapidly subsided by a rupture or debacle, &c.
  In this deposit we find remains of vegetables still existing; also of marine, fluviatile, and terrestrial shells, of species still living; likewise remains of extinct and living quadrupeds, but no human bones.
Old Deposites of the Sea. 
Accumulations of sand, rolled stones, and decayed vegetables, along the coast, more or less elevated above the present level of the sea, at high-water, (Britain).
Banks of sand and shelly marl, with bones and remains of marine animals, (East coast of England, Forth, Clyde, Norway, Oyster Bank near Rochelle, and at the mouth of the Gironde, Boston in the United States). Sandy calcareous matter deposited by the sea, in holes and fissures in calcareous rocks of the Mediterranean; compact limestone, with still existing marine shells (Nice), Mediterranean of M. Risso.
  Sandy calcareous breccia, with bones of animals not all still existing in the country, and sometimes with marine and terrestrial shells still existing there, (Nice, Corsica, Cette, Gibraltar, Cerigo, Dalmatia). Banks of corallines or madrepores above the level of the sea, (Island of Lamlash).
  Traces of Pholades at different heights on the rocks of the sea-shore, and much above high-water mark, (near Nice). Some sandy submarine banks produced by currents (Newfoundland Bank).
Old Deposits of Lakes and Rivers, along their sides or at their mouths, and much above the present level of their waters. 
Accumulations of sand, rolled stones, and decayed vegetables, on platforms, or often in the form of terraces, (Glen Roy, Lake of Geneva); some conglomerate clay-marl, with carbonized vegetables, (along the Missisippi).
Lake or river marl, with indurated calcareous nodules, bones of large animals, in part extinct, and fluviatile and terrestrial shells, of which the species exist, but are often not frequent in the country, (Garonne, Rhine, Danube, north of Germany, great plain of Eastern Hungary).
Old Deposits of Calcareous Tufa; spring and lake deposits of different epochs, with bones of terrestrial animals not existing in the country, or of which the species or even the genus is lost (Pyrmont, Southern Hartz); also with lacustrine and terrestrial shells which still exist, but of which the species is not always frequent in the country, (Baden in Austria).
Calcareous Breccia, with bones, in the interior of the Continent, (Romagnagno in the country of Verona, and Concud in Arragonia, Perigord, Adelsberg in Carniola, Mixtnitz near Berneck in Styria, Belenyesh in Eastern Hungary, Gailenreuth).
Deposits of Bones of Animals (partly of extinct species), in clay or calcareous tufa, in holes and caverns, frequent in limestone rocks.
Old Turf, sometimes under old calcareous tufa (Pyrmont), with pyrites and selenite; sometimes accidentally beneath the present level of the sea, or actually under the water of the sea, (Pomerania). Accumulated matter, produced by the falling in or falling down of mineral masses at a remote period, accidents produced by earthquakes, erosion of water, or watery infiltration, (in all hilly countries).
A part of the vegetable mould, especially on the elevated parts of the earth, produced by the decomposition of rocks, and vegetable and animal matter.
  2. Modem Alluvium, svn. Alluvium.
  In this deposit we find only remains of existing animals and vegetables; and here also human bones and products of the arts are met with.
Modern Deposits of the Sea, very little higher than the highest tide.
Accumulations of sand and rolled stones, and decayed vegetables, (Dunes in Gascony, Scotland).
Masses of Sand, sometimes calcareous, and cemented by a calcareous infiltration (Messina), with marine shells and human bones (Guadaloupe).
  Coral and Madrepore Reefs, still forming (South Sea).
Traces of Pholades, in the columns of the temple of Serapis. 
Sand-banks forming under the sea. 
Modern Deposits of Lakes and Rivers, on their sides, or at their mouths, and rising very little higher than the highest tides. 
  Accumulations of sand, rolled stones, and decayed vegetables. 
  Mud mixed with vegetable and animal matters. 
Modern Deposits of Calcareous Tufa, still forming in small lakes (Roman States, Transylvania), or from springs (Alps); pisolites, with fluviatile and terrestrial shells, and bones of animals (Valley of the Gave du Pau). 
Modern Turf deposits, still going on, and containing human bones and products of art (Scotland, Mecklenburg).
Matters accumulated by the falling in or down of rocky masses or earth (Rigy, between Deva and Dobra in Transylvania). Moraine of the glaciers, (Switzerland, Savoy).
Saline products, forming in mines, caverns, and on the soil, in many countries (Hungary, Asia); for example, saltpetre, nitrate of lime, sulphate of lime, sulphur.
Deposits of Mineral Waters, ferruginous, saline, or hot; for example bog ironore (Scotland, Mecklenburg).
Sulphur, pulverulent or crystallised (Baden in Austria). Vegetable Mould, still forming.
  II.—ON FORMATIONS. From the want of extensive geognostical knowledge, observers have sometimes been unable to distinguish properly the local from the general formations; formations, also, have been unnecessarily multiplied, and some have even fancied that new ones occurred in every country. At other times, geologists have fallen into the opposite extreme, and unnecessarily reduced the chief formations. Not having always a clear idea of the mode of formation of modern and ancient mineral masses, they have often separated the deposits of one country from those of another, because they have not agreed in all their characters. Is it not natural to suppose that an arenaceous or calcareous formation should present differences in different countries, or on the opposite sides of a basin, or in the intermediate points between the two sides of a basin. If these deposits are the products of sea and river alluvium, it is evident that the nature of the debris will vary according to the localities, and that their quantity will be more or less great; which would also partly be the case, should these rocks be attributed to a chemical precipitation. If the observed deposits are nothing else than the remains of marine animals, or similar productions, taken up and .arranged by the sea-water, the same bed will present, in different localities, varieties not only in the nature of the rock, but also in the fossils; for marine animals are not the same at different depths of the sea, at different distances from the coast, or under different zones, or in different places of the world ; and their debris must also be variously arranged or grouped together by the sea, according to the unequal motions and bottom of the ocean. For farther elucidations of this subject, I may refer the reader to the late excellent Memoir of M. C. Prevost. On the other hand, there are mineral masses, which are generally distributed, as sandstones, &c.; while others are much more local, as all unstratified rocks, also limestones, gypsum, salt, and coal. The unstratified rocks seem to have given rise to certain deposits in the countries where these rocks have appeared; thus the granite rocks are accompanied with certain conglomerates, the serpentines are near certain sandstones, the porphyries occur in the neighbourhood of the coal-formation, and of various floetz sandstones, the basalts are associated with deposits of lignite and arenaceous rocks, &c. It should not then excite surprise to find differences in the beds of the same formation in different countries. In this manner, the transition, or flcetz sandstones of a country, which contain no unstratified rocks, will differ a little from those of another country, in which these igneous, or unstratified rocks, are present. It is acknowledged that limestone rocks are not equally distributed over the earth's surface, but that they have been formed in particular localities, as in basins, sinuosities of a basin, or along submarine rocky chains. The gypsum and salt also evidently belong to the local deposits, if their mixed igneous and aqueous origin be admitted. Lastly, the combustible deposits must be placed in the same order, as facts shew that they are nothing else than vegetable and animal matters, which have been carried away from the continent by rivers, debacles, or the sea, and which have been buried under certain conglomerated rocks.
  In conformity with these views, it will be perceived how erroneous it would be to search, for instance, in the middle of a very large basin, for the coal, lignite, gypsum or salt, which are found accidentally at its margins. We will not entirely deny the success of such researches; but we may affirm, that the probability of the existence of such extensive deposits, always diminishes in the ratio of the magnitude of the basin. In an extensive basin, which might shew coal or salt at its margins, we ought not to be surprised to find here and there, instead of these inflammable or saline bodies, arenaceous matters, with little or no coal or salt.
These preliminary observations have seemed to me to be especially necessary, with the view of enabling us to classify with accuracy the deposits of a great part of the Alps, the Appenines, the Carpathians, and the Pyrenees. The three first chains present, in my tables, a great arenaceous or marly deposit, which is pretty similar to the greywacke, and which would seem to occupy the place of more than one of the arenaceous floetz formations of other countries, or which, perhaps, is an equivalent for the whole of these flcetz formations, up to the Jura limestone. This new fact would be explained, according to my ideas, by the total absence of porphyries in these great chains; for in every other part where these igneous rocks have appeared, they have given to the ancient floetz deposits their peculiar and ordinary characters; and some parts, even of the Alps, and of Hungary and Transylvania (as the Southern Tyrol, the country round Funfkirchen and Zalathna), afford us very striking examples of this general law. 
These remarks also give rise to general geognostical views regarding the floetz formations. It would seem, that, from too great a desire to examine the details, geologists have lost sight of the general facts presented by this class of deposits. Without sufficient examination, they have united under the names of ancient and recent transition class, an immense quantity of beds, containing numerous alternations of sandstone and limestone rocks; and have, on the other hand, subdivided, to a great degree, much smaller masses of deposits, because they abounded more in fossil shells, or were more easily studied. I ask, if there really exist in the flcetz period, more than two great essential and universal formations; of which the one would be eminently calcareous, and would contain the chalk and the Jura limestone, and the other generally arenaceous, and containing all the older floetz sandstones posterior to the Jura limestone?
  I confess I am inclined to this arrangement. I see in the flcetz formations the arenaceous deposits decreasing from below upwards, and the limestone from above downwards. I find between the chalk and the Jura limestone, or even in this latter (England, Dalmatia, France), nothing else than very small arenaceous masses, which even do not occur generally. On the other hand, in the older arenaceous deposits, I see only accidentally two limestone masses, of which the lowest is nowhere very thick, and of very partial distribution, and of which the other also does not seem to have the general extent of the Jura limestone. Lastly, this latter limestone shows, how extensive one's observations must have been, before we could decide whether a particular deposit is universal, or entitled to rank as a formation; for the different divisions recognised here and there in that limestone, do not exist every where; some of these divisions are sometimes represented by very different rocks, and even that which seems the most important, the lias, is wanting in the whole of the south-eastern part of Europe, as in the Appenines, the Alps, Austria, and Hungary.
Whatever other opinions may yet be formed on the subjects in question, these are the ideas which seem to have been embraced by many eminent geologists, who are accustomed to consult nature with the hammer in their hand, and not through the medium of books. I may also remark, that, so early as 1816, Professor Jameson was not far from these ideas, with which every known fact in geological geography is in accordance. Nevertheless, I believe it of importance to retain all the existing subdivisions, and even to endeavour to establish still more, in order to enable us to comprehend more easily the whole detail of the complicated structure of the earth's crust.
III. On the changes that appear to have taken place during the different periods of the Earth's formation, in the climate of our globe, and in the nature, and the physical and geographical distribution of its animals and plants. 
  If we attend to the changes produced on the earth by volcanoes, rivers, the ocean, the atmosphere, and various chemical agencies, we shall obtain very simple theoretical ideas, which will enable us to explain the formation of the groups of rocks of which the crust of the earth is composed, by well known physical and chemical facts. The Tabular View of Rocks, given in volume 18th of The Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, shews the causes of the changes that have taken place in the temperature of the surface of the globe, and, in consequence of it, in the three kingdoms of nature; and it resolves in a very natural manner the greatest geological problem, for it assigns the reasons for the formation of the various zones in latitude, longitude, and height, for the establishment of different climates on the earth, for the successive changes in the various creations of the three kingdoms, and for the particular distribution of the remains of the ancient or lost creations. All these problems seem to be resolved, by admitting, at a former period, a much greater activity in the chemical actions which are still the source of presently existing volcanoes. This first proposition is founded on a series of facts, stated in my Tabular View of Rocks, from which it appears that the igneous action decreases in a contrary ratio to the Neptunian, from the ancient to the modern periods. If these chemical subterraneous operations have gradually diminished from ancient to modern times, less volcanic matter has been formed, and smaller tracts of countries have been volcanized or subjected to the igneous action and change; and as the high temperature of these volcanic products must have elevated the temperature of the atmosphere, it is clear, that, in proportion as the formation of these volcanic masses became less considerable, the heat of the atmosphere and surface of the earth also diminished. Volcanic actions are generally accompanied by fissures, by fallings in and risings up of tracts of country. These effects must also have been produced formerly as now; but their causes being then infinitely greater than at present, the changes operated must also have been proportionally much more considerable. This, also, seems to explain to us the rising up of certain strata, or certain parts of continents, as well as the successive sinking of the level of the sea, or its inclosure within its present limits. It is obvious that a consequence resulting from this is, that, in the earlier states of the globe, the seas and continents were changing more rapidly than in the more modern; that the temperature of the earth also was decreasing more rapidly: but, at the same time, in consequence of this decreasing heat, the evaporation must have diminished; the rays of the sun, in a less moist atmosphere, must have become less hot; the rains must have decreased in quantity, and the atmospheric meteors must have generally become less considerable; the streams of water must have gradually lost their original greatness, as well as their destructive energy; and the inclined planes along which they flowed must have diminished, or increased, according to local circumstances. On the other hand, the countries from which the sea was retiring, or those which had been raised up, must have lost a part of their temperature. It is also to be concluded, that the diminution of the temperature was not equally the same over the whole surface of the globe, but that it took place in proportion to the extent of the volcanic masses, to the degree of their cooling, to that of the retreat of the sea, and to the position of the different parts of the earth, compared with their level above the sea, with their removal from the sea5 and with their position in reference to the sun. The last propositions shew, first, the probability that there have always been parts on the earth warmer than the others; and explain, besides, how the zones of temperature have been established in latitude, longitude and height, and also, according to local circumstances, the various climates of the whole earth. It is known that every zone, and nearly every climate that is more or less general, has its peculiar animals and vegetables; or, at least, it is a fact, that the distribution of animals and vegetables is most materially influenced by the division of the surface of the earth into zones, and into countries or climates. Is it not natural to search in the successive establishment of these different zones and climates, the cause of the differences observed, not only between the present vegetable and animal creations, and those similar creations which are buried in the earth, but also of those known variations in these last creations? Geology has shewn, that the farther we penetrate into the crust of the earth, the more simplicity do we observe in the vegetable and animal productions, and the more uniformity must the surface of the earth formerly have presented in its creations. This can only be a consequence of the greater equality of temperature which took place formerly over the whole terrestrial surface, for the assigned causes had then converted into warm zones those which are now cold or temperate; and they perhaps gave the torrid zone a temperature much higher than it now possesses, while, at the same time, certain parts of this zone could only have the temperature of the other zones by various circumstances not understood. As the zones and climates gradually became established, the vegetables and animals became diversified; the vegetables of certain parts of the earth also presently became extinct, because they no longer found the climate which they required; and, according to their distribution at that period, and to the temperature necessary for their existence, some are no longer found upon the earth, others have degenerated, and some genera, or even perhaps some species, requiring a pretty high temperature, still live within the tropics. The animals which were not possessed of the faculty of locomotion, must have experienced the same fate as plants; but those species which could move, must have employed the means thus afforded them to travel, when it became necessary, into climates which were favourable to their existence. Some, suddenly brought into cold climates, in consequence of volcanic elevations, or the retreat of the sea, must have perished entirely, or must have remained in life only near the equator; others would soon have nowhere found the climate adapted for them, and their races would have become extinct; while, at the same time, others would have descended, first, from the hills into the valleys and flat country, and, afterwards, they would no longer have been able to emigrate, when the temperature would already have been too cold for them in these last localities.
These ideas afford a clear explanation of those mixtures of vegetables and animals of the temperate and torrid zone, that seem at first unintelligible; they also afford us the key to those centres of creation which have been perceived on the globe, and account for the intimate relations which seem to be established between the geological structure of the earth's crust, and the geographical distribution of plants and animals, and particularly the accidental isolated state of some of them. The fossil conchologist will conclude, a priori, from these propositions, that the more we approach the poles from the equator, the more will the fossil remains be similar or analogous in genera or species, to those at present existing between the tropics. The more recent the formations are, the more hope may we have of still finding the analogous, or even identical, species of their fossils. But, on the contrary, the more ancient the deposit is, the less reason will we have to expect to find identical, or even analogous, species in the sea or fresh water of the torrid zone; for this zone perhaps no longer presents all the circumstances necessary for the existence of such beings, notwithstanding the actual heat of that part of the earth. Lastly, the more recent the formations observed in different continents, or in a particular continent, are, the more must their fossils differ from one continent to another, or rather from one zone to another, and also, at the same time, from one basin to another. But the fossils of these various countries will always be in the same relation with respect to the number of the analogous or similar species, with the animals still living in these various localities. These last propositions, deduced a priori, are conformable to experience, and have been, and will still probably be, ably elucidated by Baron de Ferussac.
Thus far does geology conduct us. We see with some pride on our side, a Ferussac (see his Geological Ideas on Tertiary Basins, in the Journal de Physique, and his article on the Geographical Distribution of the Mollusca in the Dictionnaire Classique d'Histoire Naturelle, 1825), a Humboldt, (see his Nouvelle Recherches sur la Distribution des Vegetaux, in the Dictionnaire des Sciences Naturelles, and his Discours sur les Volcans), a Fourier, (Memoires sur la Chaleur Terrestre), a Von Buch, (see his beautiful Memoirs on Trap Porphyries, and those on the Tyrol and Germany, in Leonard's Taschenbuch, 1824), a Crichton, (Memoir on the Climates of the Globe, in the Annals of Philosophy, February and March 1825), and a Baubeny. Geology certainly enables us to perceive an uninterrupted series of igneous and neptunian phenomena; that science alone cannot yet explain all the details of these in a satisfactory manner; but she expects additional light from the progress of chemistry, natural philosophy, and astronomy; and then only will it be allowed to the philosopher to elevate himself to ideas of pure geogony.

