Dear Sir,
I HAVE prepared a very full account of my late geological observations, which I hope to publish on my return from Tran-
sylvania. In the mean time, as many of the facts are of importance, and do not agree with the statements of Mr Buckland,and
other English geologists, I send the following outline for your information, &c. &c. I remain your affectionate pupil, 

Since the comparatively recent period at which Geology began to assume the form of a science, it has been cultivated with
assiduity and success, insomuch that at the present day we may be said to possess a general knowledge of almost every portion
of Europe; but in order to render this knowledge complete and satisfactory, it is necessary to review the facts adduced, to com-
pare the phenomena exhibited in different countries, and to state the result with accuracy and precision. For this purpose the
travelling geologist must perform his journeys after a determinate plan, and not run about at random, as it were, from one district to another. Those, in the mean time, who are stationary in particular places, must give us minute details of their neighbourhood, endeavour to make their observations coincide with the general results obtained by the other class of geologists, and not be foolish enough to imagine, that they themselves individually are surrounded by a world entirely different from the rest of the surface of the earth, or to regulate, according to the supposed structure of their small corner, all the other parts of the crust of our planet. Such are the ideas which have directed me in my travels: to acquire a perfect knowledge of the whole of the fla;tz and tertiary formations, and to derive clear ideas of the structure of the secondary rocks of the Alps, seemed to be, in this period of the science, the most important desiderata; and to arrive at these results, no country held out so many hopes as the south of Germany and France; the truth of which presumption will be shown by my narrative.
The geological structure of France is much more simple than that of Germany. A great elevated range of slaty and primary
hills occupies the central point of that country (the limits of which see in Omalius d'Halloy's Map of France). Around this
kind of island are arranged three great secondary basins; one called the South-eastern or Mediterranean, the second the
Oceanic or South-western, and the third the Northern. The first lies between the Alps and the mountains of the Vivarais and
Lozere; the second between the Pyrenees and the hills of La Vendee, the Limosin and La Montagne Noire: the third be-
tween the chain of Bretagne and Cotentin, that of Auvergne,the Vosges and Ardennes. These three basins communicate
with each other; the south-western with the northern one, by the country around Poictiers; and with the south-eastern by the
neighbourhood of Carcassone; and the northern with this last between Vienne and Grenoble. Besides, the northern second-
ary basin has a free communication with the basins of the northern, middle and southern parts of Germany, and with that of
Switzerland and even of Hungary. The southern and more ancient part of the Vosges, the Black Forest, the Odenwald,
the great schistose tract of Belgium and Westphalia, the Hartz, the hills around Bohemia with the Thuringerwald, and the cen-
tral part of the Northern Carpathians, are so many islands of this immense ancient sea; and the Eastern Carpathians are a vast promontory of the great Alpine island.
The south-western basin of France is limited on the north by the transition countries of Vendee and Bretagne, which contain here
and there masses of granite, surrounded by crystalline slates and traversed by porphyry veins, (Fond de la Boulogne), ex-
hibiting the same phenomena as in the Erzgebirge. Some small patches of sandstone of the coal formation, and todtliegende, are
also found here and there. In Limosin and Arveisin, we find nearly the same structure. Granites are still very extensively dif-
fused, crystalline slates (gneiss) in particular are abundant, and here and there the coalformations with their porphyry are beautifully exposed. (Figeai.) The Pyrenees are a great transition chain, very regularly stratified from W.N W. to E.SE. The pre-
dominant rocks are slates and greywackes, with their subordinate common indurated quartzose or calcareous slates, and masses of
limestone. These last are not only compact, or intermixed with slate, as in Argyleshire, but are often most beautifully crystalline, in short, appear as true primary limestone, and with many interesting minerals imbedded, such as augite(pyroxene), hornblende, (amphibole), made, grenatite, &c.; yet these in the same bed pass into the compact conchiferous and calcareous rock, and even contain here and there traces of organic beings. In one or two instances we observe also in these slates a bed of granular gypsum, (Tarascon). Among these great accumulations of transition rocks, there appear large unstratified masses,
sometimes surrounded by small portions of crystalline slates.
These masses consist of granites, sienites, serpentines, and hornblendic (pyroxenic) rocks. The granites occupy the
greatest spaces, and are especially associated with crystalline slates (gneiss, and mica-slate, chiefly Jeldspaihic); yet these
last pass every where, and most evidently, into the true transition slates, and even alternate with them. (See Palassou.)
Similar facts are seen every where, and from this circumstance, Werner established his class of primitive clay-slate,—
a class which can no longer be admitted, since all the localities where this deposit ought to exist in Europe contain
organic remains. This transition has also led the chief of the Edinburgh School to his idea of the contemporaneous formation
of many rocks, which at first were considered as of a very different nature.
The granites of the Pyrenees do not form nuclei, as Werner supposes; but they present themselves in the form of what he
would have called immense beds in gneiss. This appearance, however, is not real; for minute examination on a great scale
shows, that they have all the characters of veins, often here and there running parallel to the plane of stratification of the slates. This statement, contrary to the opinion of the most learned geologists, is supported by the limited space of these masses, by the existence of innumerable true granite veins, by the phenomena exhibited by an infinite number of small granitoid veins, which are associated with the last, by the fragments of slate imbedded in the granite, and the particular appearances observable in the rocks near the Junction oftlie granite.
On these different points I may only here observe, that the distinction of two granites in the Pyrenees forms no objection to
my ideas; and farther, that the fragments of slate in granite are seen in the Pyrenees not merely in small pieces, but sometimes
in immense wedge-shaped masses, or even hillocks, supported by granite. No country exemplifies this more clearly; and the
fact explains the imbedded masses of slate in the porphyry of Schemnitz mentioned by Beudant in his Travels in Hungary. The alterations in the condition of the slates near the granite, similar to those near the prophyry of Vendee and the Erzgebirge, are to be seen in the Pyrenees on a great scale. Whoever has seen the beautiful series of granitic veins which cut and sometimes support the granite of Louerup,Cierp and Massat, will no longer doubt the igneous origin of granite posterior to the slate formation. If the rock named Blaue Kuppe be a clear proof of the truth of the igneous t heory respecting basalt, these places shew that the true origin of granite had also been discovered by Hutton; and our respect for the views of this original thinker is increased by observing, that the masses of granular limestone seem to be in closedependence upon the masses of granite. Where these appear, the compact limestone is more or less changed, and in it minerals have been produced, for which we search in vain in the other parts of the slate formation.
But Hutton furnished no explanation of the most difficult point, I mean the origin of gneiss, of crystalline slate, connected
.with transition slate. The Pyrenees seem also to afford a hint of this particular process of nature. Gneiss is not, like granite,an igneous product; many objections oppose themselves to such an opinion, and the shelly granular limestone imbedded in the gneiss of the Pyrenees, and its passage into transition slate, seem to render it very improbable. Viewing the crystalline slates as aggregate fragments of more ancient rocks, or of the first oxidated crust of the earth, might it not be possible that igneous agents had, before, after, and simultaneously, with the granitic eruptions, acted upon the slates, and produced in them
a kind of change? Heat and gaseous emanations would have given, especially under strong compression, a kind of igneous
liquefaction to slate, similar to that observed by De Dree in his experiments. The elements of the slates having lost a part
of their cohesion, caloric and subterraneous emanations would have occupied the void spaces; chemical affinity would have
exerted itself within limits fixed by the force of cohesion,and the constituent parts of rocks would have been able to
assume, in the liquefaction or slow cooling, an arrangement more or less crystalline, according to the accessary circumstances,
without losing much of their primitive slaty structure. This action of chemical affinities, assisted by foreign matter, intro-
duced by a kind of sublimation, would have given rise to a number of species and subspecies of crystalline minerals, dis-
seminated in nests or in small veins, and only a very small number of other minerals would have been posteriorly formed
in it, by aqueous infiltration. According to this theory, the subterraneous agents would have been always decreasing in
energy from the granites to the basalts, which would depend upon the change that had taken place, during the lapse of time,
in the crust of the earth, owing to the want of compression,and the greater mass of solids accumulated upon it.
This hypothesis explains the facts in a manner agreeable with geological, chemical, and physical knowledge. The inequality
of these effects would have given rise to arenaceous, or even vegetable deposits, mixed with crystalline (Tarentaise), and ex-
plains the passage of crystalline into transition slate. The identity of the materials of these rocks with those of granite; the chemical composition of various subspecies of minerals, minerals being more crystallized in the truly crystalline rocks than in
those which are less so; the mutual insertion of various crystals of two different substances; the made, the scoriaceous surface
of minerals (augite, Pyrenees and Scandinavia); the scapolites surrounded with a slaggy crust of augite; the identity of
the disseminated minerals in gneiss and granite; the connection of these two rocks; the nests of calcareous spar, with other mi-
nerals; the intermixture of granular and compact limestone; their small veins; the gneiss breccia; and even in part the dis-
turbed situation of the gneiss, &c. are clearly explained, and even support this view. The theory supposes only the destruc-
tion of masses, of which we see no traces, as is often the case with the fragments in greywacke.
Very few sienites exist in the Pyrenees, but many masses of greenstone (Ophite, Palassou). These hornblendic and epidotic
rocks contain small veins of stilbite, and of quartz, and some iron-pyrites and specular iron-ore, &c. Their varieties are very
numerous, exhibiting every form between the two extremes, which are that sort of true greenstone called Primitive, and a
kind of basaltic hornblendic Clinkstone; they are massive, globular, or rarely irregularly prismatic. Like the greenstone
of the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, they sometimes pass into a green steatitic or serpentine mass. (See Palassou's Memoire sur
rOphite). Their position is the same with the globular greenstone of the Fichtelgebirge, and the orbicular greenstone of Cor-
sica; they form among the slates large veins often running parallel to the schist; or rather they have filled up crevices, which
have happened here and there, upon a certain line of direction.
Serpentines are rare in the Pyrenees; they seem only to be portions of the greenstone veins, a character which might per-
haps distinguish them from the diallage serpentine. Hornblendic or pyroxenic rocks are also uncommon, and have nearly
the same position. At Lherz they form a large column, which,near its contact with the granular limestone, has formed here
and there a kind of brecciated mass of augite and limestone.
Old red-sandstone seems to exist in the Pyrenees, and even a deposit analogous to mountain limestone; but there is no pro-
per coaUformation. The first jloztz limestone, of a greenish hue, and compact texture, alternates with arenaceous indurated marly
rocks, with vegetable remains; and rarely there are found masses of a kind of rauchwacke, with sulphur and bitumen, like that of
Bex and Tarnowitz (St. Boen). The variegated sandstone or red marl is extended all along the base of both sides of the Pyre-
nees, or in their valleys; it is every where marly and argillaceous, with gypsum and salt-springs, and with salt-deposits in
Spain. As in other countries, it contains beds of micaceous specular iron-ore (Bastenes), also gypsum (Pouillon), crystals of
ferruginous quartz (Hyacinthe de Compostella), and arragonites, as in Spain. Some beds of limestone, either compact or
identical with the Hartz roestone, are seen towards the upper part of the formation (near Dax), and indicate the approach of the
second ficetz limestone or shell limestone (muschelkalk), which is compact, and to be seen here and there under the Jura lime-
stone. The thirdflwtz sandstone, or quadersandstein, forms also an extensive tract along the whole course of the Pyrenees: it
is always white or grey, more or less fine grained, marly, and with mica, and contains vegetable remains and marine fossils,
together with traces of lignite and hydrate of iron, or brown iron-ore. The Jura limestone lies over it, and forms, especially
at both extremities of the chain, an extensive tract of country.
Some traces of gryphite limestone or lias, magnesian Jura limestone, and compact limestone, with few beds of oolite, compose
this deposit, in the lower part of which there are traces of lignite (Les Corbieres).
Of all these floetz formations, the Jura limestone only reappears in the northern part of the great south-western secondary basin
of France, and covers all the others, excepting a small patch of zechstein, and perhaps of shell-limestone (muschelkalk), near
Figeai and that neighbourhood. All the northern part of Perigord, the southern part of Poitou and the Saintonge, are Jura
limestone. Here and there some masses of gypsum belonging perhaps to the red marl, make their appearance (Rochefort). In
the eastern part, the lias and compact limestone abound; in the western, the compact newer limestone, the shelly limestone, and
the coral rag or calcaire a, polypiers (La Rochelle). The enumeration of the beautiful petrifactions of this deposit would not
be consistent with the limited nature of this communication: they are various and characteristic; Diceras, Ammonites, Tere-
bratulae, Cerithia, &c. Upon the Jura deposit there lie upon both sides of the basin, the iron and green sandformation, and
the chalk; the first deposit is most beautifully seen in the Saint, onge, and in the departments des Landes. Its component parts
are sand, sandstone, fine and coarse, indurated sandstone, used for, ferruginous sandstone, beds of clay, short beds
of lignites, and of fuci (Isle d'Aix), with siliceous infiltrations, and a particular fossil resin, like amber, and nests of hydrate of iron, under the form of brown iron-ore, and haematite, &c.
This is the formation which affords nearly all the iron so actively employed in the Perigord of Poitou. Upon this deposit,
which is more or less intermixed with green particles like chlorite, rests the coarse chalk, which presents, in Saintonge and
elsewhere, some characters different from that part of the chalk of other countries. It is a kind of very white, compact, and
porous limestone, which soils the hand very little, and is an aggregate of minutely triturated marine organic beings.
Yet some larger bodies are found here and there; for instance Serpulites, Caprinites, Ichthyosarcolites, some Pectens and Tri-
gonia, &c. Upon this chalk, without chlorite, repose, on the north side of the basin, the chalk, with flints and siliceous petri-
factions, containing Alcyons, Cyclolites, Nummulites, and many Echinites, Flustrae, Gorgoniae, Madreporae, &c. Near the Pyre-
nees the chloritic chalk, with crabs, is more abundant, and the chalk is very much destroyed and buried under the tertiary de-
posites.
The tertiary basin of the south-west of France contains four formations; the molasse; the coarse marine limestone; the
fresh water deposit; and a great marine marly, and especially arenaceous deposit. The molasse taking the place of the plas-
tic clay of other countries, presents, as in Switzerland, alternations of marls, clay-marls of different colours, with calcareous and micaceous sandstones, and sometimes very coarse conglomerate, (nagelfluh). Very few traces of lignite are seen in it, and only in the uppermost part; and in a few instances some remains of marine shells are seen in it (Libourne); but fragments of bones, probably of quadrupeds, exist here and there.
Upon the undulating surface of this formation rests the coarse marine limestone, (calcaire grossiere), as it is distinctly seen all along the Dordogne from Libourne to Blaye. This calcareous deposit is divided into two parts; the lower compact, the upper
sandy, andfidl of the most beautifully preserved shells. The compact marine limestone contains no chlorite, but sometimes quartz-
pebbles, and traces of bituminous beds, and even of lignites: it is a white or yellowish stone, more or less porous and indurated,composed of triturated particles of organic marine bodies; Cerithia, Echinites, &c. are found in it. The other variety is a true marly sand, of a greyish or yellowish colour, and containing shells, the species of which can be referred to sixty-three genera of Lamarck, besides many Lunulites, Madrepores, and some remains of Cetacea, and even perhaps of quadrupeds, as of the Mastodon (Dax). These remains are distributed in these faluns irregularly, so that some fossils have their particular localities, and then they are very frequent. Many are similar to those of the calcaire grossier of Paris; but many also are like those of the Mediterranean deposits, or are peculiar to the basin. This formation occupies only the western part of the basin; and the middle part (Department de Lot et Garonne, &c.) is occupied by the fresh-water deposit which lies upon the molasse, and indicates its posteriority to the compact marine limestone, by a curious alternation of a bed of fresh water limestone, with the Jhlun at Saucas, and by the intermixture of Melanopsides, Helices,Planorbes, Neritines, in the upper part of the falun or sandy marl of Dex. These localities are in the place where the water of the fresh-water lake discharged itself into the sea.
The plateaux of fresh-water limestone, consist of a thick bed of a compact white or yellow limestone, which is without shells, and which in specimens might often be confounded with Jura limestone, although, in the great, the geologist easily discovers in it the characteristic pores and concretionary structure of a lake deposit. The upper part is an ordinary cavernous fresh-water
limestone, sometimes a little bituminous, and with the common shells of the Helix, Planorbis, and Lymnaea kinds, and fragments
of bones of quadrupeds, (Palootherium). Some veins of barytes exjst in the first, and some masses of millstone or coarse flint, similar to the Parisian, are imbedded in it, with fragments of siliceous wood. Upon this rock there rest marls and argillaceous clay, with nests ofcockscombgypsum, (gypsum en crete de coq), and a bed of marl with large oysters. At last we find the great sandy deposits forming the Landes, and existing over a vast extent of country. It is a pure quartzose sand, cemented here and there by hydrate of iron (Chalosse), and for that reason able only to jrear pines and cork-trees. In the Chalosse it is more marly, and contains nests of a singularly pure clay, and of the mineral called Lenzinite. (See Journal de Physique, 1822.)
The alluvial matters are very abundant upon the base of the Pyrenees. They are divided into older, very much above the le-
vel of the present rivers; and into modern; and consist of pebbles, sand, rolled masses, marls with land-shells, like those found in Austria, and of various tuffaccous calcareous rocks.
This last tertiary basin is distinguished from that of Paris, chiefly by containing molasse instead of plastic clay; by wanting
the upper fresh-water deposits ; by containing a coarse limestone, sandy above and chloritic below, and by showing scarcely any
traces of gypsum.
If these recent formations are different, the comparison of the secondary ones also presents some variations. The chalk in the
north of France is not so much destroyed, and forms a whole basin. The coarse chalk of both countries differs; but excepting
in the great frequency of vegetable remain sand iron deposits in the ferruginous and green sand of the south, the northern
similar formation is identical with that of Gascony. The Jura deposit is far more complete every where in the north of France
than in the south; from both sides the lias forms a line (in Normandy, Lorraine and Luxembourg), under the lower oolite
and compact limestone; then come the upper oolite and compact rocks, and in Normandy the coral rag, and the other newest
beds of the English Jura deposit. 
The lias in Lorraine, &c. shows many beds full of nests of hydrate of iron, and gives rise to extensive mining districts,
(Haut Maine, Luxembourg). It is separated from the variegated sandstone, by some patches of quadersandstein at Vic Metz, and
especially in Luxembourg, (See Steininger's map). This is a shelly freestone, sometimes pretty coarse. Under it is the shell
limestone, muschelkalk, or second floetz limestone, which surrounds nearly the whole of the Vosges, and has all the charac-
ters of the German one. Then comes the variegated sandstone of Lorraine, with its gypsum, salt-deposit, and subordinate beds
of limestone, compact, or similar to the roggenstein, which indicates the approach of the shell limestone, (muschelkalk.)
If Bretagne and La Vendee have a great resemblance to the Pyrenees, the chain of the Vosges is almost entirely different; for
there, we find ourselves in the midst of the greywacke and feldspathic breccia, that characterise some districts of Cumber-
land and Wales. Porphyries, which are wanting in the Pyrenees, are found herein abundance, and gneiss rarely; yet we find again
at Framont, agranular transition limestone near to, or in, a ferruginous porphyry, full of small veins of hydrate of iron, which
bring to our remembrance not only the position of the granular limestone of the Pyrenees, but also the limestone, full of small
veins of the same iron, near the granitie rock of Vic-dessus. (See Daubuisson.) The rest of the Vosges is a great deposit of coal-sandstone, with columns and veins of porphyry, and beds of porphyritic conglomerate, as in the greywacke. Above it comes an
accumulation of todtliegendes, under the form of a porphyritic detritus, and a coarse red conglomerate with quartzose rolled mas-
ses, &c., as in the Thuringerwald; and then immediately above it, without the zechstein, which is wanting, or slightly represented somewhere else, the variegated red quartzose sandstone, with its superior marly beds, lies upon the Vosges as upon the cover of a house. These upper-beds of the variegated sandstone, contain here and there traces of lignite, and impressions of monocotyledones and ferns (Soultz), and some petrifactions of the shell limestone (muschelkalk), which explains the anomaly of the salt-deposit of Gallicia and Marmarosch. (See Beudant).
In the valley of the Rhine, above the shell limestone (muschel-kalk), are seen on both sides below Strasbourg, some patches
of Jura oolites, and even of lias at Buxweiler, then succeeds the plastic clay, with molasse and nagelfluh beds, and some
remains of quadrupeds; then the coarse marine limestone, with fresh-water shells in the northern part, and in the southern patches offresh-water limestone (Haguenau Buxweiler), with nearly the same organic remains as the South of France, excepting some
Cyclades and Cerithia, like fresh-water univalves. Great alluvial deposits, and accumulations of marl with land-shells, accompany
the Rhine, and hide, at the base of the Kaiserstuhle, a basaltic group, without crater and coulee, and with very few scoriae;
it is an elevated mass, like the trachytic hills and basalts of Eissenach. From a smaller opening have proceeded the rocks of
Alt Breisach. The chains on the east of the Rhine consist of the Black Forest, composed of granite and gneiss, and the Odenwald principally of newer unstratified rocks, as sienite, granite, porphyry; and hills on both sides of these ranges seem to
consist of the two great red arenaceous deposits of the Vosges, which are not, however, separated by the magnesian limestone
(zechstein); yet, on the east of the Black Forest, the porphyries have given rise also to some porphyritic detritus, which lies under the coarse red conglomerate, which cannot be confounded with any other, by an observer acquainted with the characters
of the old red sandstone, the todliegende, or newer red sandstone, and the red marl.
On the west of these chains, the red marl has been much destroyed, and has given rise to the valley of the Rhine, inclosed
between two precipitous ranges of rock; but on the east it is still entire, and forms an extensive tract of country from these
to the German Jura chain, (See Keferstein's Map). It abounds in Wirtemberg, and its marls present the same appearances as
elsewhere. They contain gypsum, salt-deposits, beds of limestone, and traces of vegetables.
We shall now trace the shell limestone, and shew that by some observers it has been confounded with the Zechstein.
It may afford matter of surprise that I should contradict the opinion of so many celebrated men, but the fact is clear, and the
confusion has arisen merely from mistake regarding the geognostical position of the Jura limestone. In Swabia, geologists not
finding the zechstein, and yet being anxious to recognise a deposit so well known in the north, had naturally, from their not being acquainted with the shell limestone (muschelkalk), taken this deposit for the zechstein, because it lies above what they rightly consider as the todliegende. This base admitted, they naturally believed that the salt-deposit was placed between their zechstein and todliegende, and this salt they rendered subordinate to the zechstein or alpine limestone of Friesleben. Further, they then naturally called the Jura limestone the Shell limestone, (muschel-kalk), and the quadersandstein the Red marl. But when it is once acknowledged, what it is impossible to deny, that their shell limestone (muschelkalk) is not the zechstein, but in reality the second flcetz limestone, it then naturally follows that, as every where else, the salt-deposit lies under the great mass of that formation, and alternates with the lower part of it.
The shell limestone {muschelkalk) of Wirtemberg or of Wurzburg, is in every respect the same as that of the north of
Germany, and above it comes the quadersandstein, or third flcetz sandstone, which surrounds the Jura chain, and lies
under it. The most interesting parts of this deposit are the environs of Amberg, where it contains short beds of marly
rock, with vegetable impressions (Lycopodites), or siliciferous beds, and a kind of coarse tripoli with carpolites. The lias
lies above it, and alternates with argillaceous and sandy beds: it is a compact marly rock of a greyish colour, or slaty,
with Gryphites arcuata, Plagiostomata, Ammonites, Belemnites, Mytiloides, Reptiles, &c., in short, with all the fossils
common to the lias and alum-slate of England; so that I would recommend this part of Germany to the study of those
English geologists who are inclined to confound the shell limestone (muschelkalk) of Germany with the lias, because the
first deposit does not appear to exist, or but very sparingly, in their own country. This formation is also very interfering, from its clay containing masses of brown iron-ore, or hydrate of iron, which are wrought with advantage, and which
rarely contain small veins of wavellite, and of oxide of manganese, and are here and there changed by the quantity of marine
exuviae into granular or compact, or even into beautiful crystallized phosphate of iron (Amberg). The well known nests of
compact and reniform phosphorite are also found in a clay subordinate to the lias of Amberg. » 
In Wirtemberg, the quadersandstein becomes always thinner as you proceed to the south, and forms patches upon the shell
limestone (muschelkalk). Then the shell limestone (muschel-kalk), also occupies a narrow line between the red sand-
stones of the Black Forest and the lias; and, at last, on the Rhine and in Switzerland, this shell limestone (muschelkalk)
appears only with its highest parts among the lias and Jura limestone; it is the Rauchgrauer Kalk of Mr Merian. 
The German Jura chain forms a great promontory or digue, filling up a cavity which rises to the north, and is deepest to-
ward the south. As I have already shown, it consists of five different parts: 1st, The lias and its marls, which are the con-
necting part between the Jura deposit and the quadersandstein; Stdly, The magnesian Jura cavernous mass; Sdly, The com-
pact and oolitic part; 4ithly, The schistose lithographic part, which is so rich in fishes and crabs; bthly, The clay marl with
globular iron-ore.
The magnesian Jura limestone presents most singular varieties. When it is a congeries of triturated marine bodies, as near
Ratisbon, it assumes the appearance of the porous yellow limestone of the Leithagebirge near Vienna in Austria. The
petrifactions or fossils of the compact limestone are very abundant. I would recommend to collectors to go to Amberg,
which is one of the best places, and where Professor Graf, a gentleman of erudition, and who has travelled much, sells for a
trifle all the petrifactions of the neighbourhood.
Chalk is only deposited upon the Jura limestone near Ratisbone, yet the ferruginous marl connects already the two forma-
tions; the green sand, and the chloritic chalk with Gryphites, columba Brg. and spirata Schlottheim, form the chief parts of
this deposit. A yellowish-brown limestone, with some madrepores, seems to belong also to it; and under the green sand is a
coarse quartzose and calcareous conglomerate, and some nests of a good refractory clay (Abach).
In the basin between the Bohmerwaldgebirge and the Black Forest, there are no tertiary deposits, and only fluviatile marls
with land shells, and some calcareous tuffa with bones of quadrupeds; yet, in the Jura chain, there exist at Ulm, at Stein-
heini, and in a great basin near Wallersten, Oettingen, Nordlingen, &c., fresh-water limestone deposits, with the common shells
of the genera Lymna, Planorbis, Helix, and Paludina. At Steinheim, the deposit is, in its lower part, sandy, and so full
of shells that they may collect them in bushels. Basaltic eruptions have, here and there, found means to traverse the Jura
chain: they are chiefly tuffa, full of altered pieces of Jura limestone (Urach, Gottingen); they form large veins or columns,
and, in some instances, present themselves in the form of veins of basalt, as near Doneschingen. In the Hegau, they form
cones of clinkstone; and on the base of the Fichtelgebirge cones or columns of basalt, sometimes with balls of olivine and pieces
of granitose porphyritic rocks, reduced to the state of basalt jasper of Hausmann, similar to the black shelly rocks of Port-
rush and Skye.
The Bohmerwaldgebirge is a great mass of gneiss, slate and granite. The granite forms in it large masses, or only conical emi-
nences sometimes hidden by the gneiss, or occurs in veins of a more recent origin, and with many beautiful minerals, as tourma-
line, dichroite, andalusite, tantalium, &c. The domes of granite are here and there abundantly supplied with kaolin, which is
certainly intermixed with much scapolite, either disintegrated or nearly in its primitive state. Even the gneiss often contains
kaolin, and many small veins of granite. Specular iron-ore and graphite are seen in it, and sometimes most abundantly, so as to
seem to occupy the place of mica. According to my speculative views, we see here a long and great action of the
subterraneous agents, and the existence of so much iron and graphite is a consequence of this: the first is a produce of
sublimation, as in the extinct volcanoes, the latter an alteration of glance-coal or anthracite, in the same way as this substance has been changed by trap in Scotland. This leads to the idea that diamond may have been formed in the same manner, and might also be searched for in gneiss-like rocks, and in granite or sienite, while the grains of platina, like those of titanitic iron, sufficiently indicate their origin from the destruction of granitose unstratified rocks. And here I may remark, that it is a singular circumstance, that the Bavarian travellers in Brasil found the rocks of that country perfectly similar to those we have just mentioned, for almost every specimen of that distant country has its analogous one in Bavaria. Some veins of porphyry exist also in the gneiss of the Bohmerwaldgebirge (Bodenwehr).
The structure of the secondary formations of the Alps has puzzled many geologists; yet, the means of cutting the Gordian
knot have been given by Escher, De Buch, Mohs, Lupin, Uttinger, Pantz, Keferstein, &c. The writings of these excellent
geologists, together with the judiciously managed travels of M. Buckland, have enabled us at last to acquire a distinct view of
this part of the alpine regions. It would be quite useless for me to relate my own observations in this place, were I not of an
opinion different from that of Professor Buckland upon the newer deposits of the Alps.
Upon the old red sandstone rests the great alpine calcareous tract, which belongs to the zechstein or magnesian limestone;
it is in great part a magnesian limestone, which presents some varieties of rocks, one of which is rather compact, another
somewhat granular, while another is fetid, and some, particularly those in the upper part of the formation, are porous, or
present the structure of the rauchwacke (Eisenertz.) In its lower parts there are vast deposits of lead and zinc, in the 
form of small veins; bitumen is found here and there in it; in some places mercury has been collected, which could only
come from some bituminous part of this formation, and here and there are found columns of porphyry (Hindelong, Geis-
alp). This grey, or yellowish, or whitish limestone, forms very high hills of at least 7000 or 9000 feet, and its masses very
rarely show any traces of stratification. Petrifactions are exceedingly rare in it. It is the Hochgebirgskalk of Escher and
Uttinger, and a part of the alpine limestone of Humboldt, Freisleben, De Buch, &c. It is impossible to confound it with any other
limestone deposit, for it has not the slaty structure of the transition limestone, nor the petrifactions of the shell limestone (muschelkalk), and, besides, it lies everywhere under the variegated sandstone and salt-formation. This last formation presents, in the Alps, as elsewhere, two masses, an arenaceous and a marly.
The first is composed of alternations of grey wacke-like micaceous sandstone, seldom very coarse, with marls which are of a greyish, brownish, or yellowish colour; in short, not red like the variegated sandstone of Germany, because in the northern part of the Alps there have been no porphyries, to give them the necessary supply of bydrated oxide of iron. These rocks are placed above, and sometimes also below the marly masses, which consist of alternations of various marls, more or less indurated, and of a brown, reddish-brown, blackish, greyish, or greenish colour: they contain gypsum and rock salt. Petrifactions are not
seen in this formation, but there are many vegetable remains, often of marine plants (Kahlenberg). This formation, which is
distinctly stratified in thin layers, lies between the magnesian limestone and the shell limestone (muschelkalk); and, as else-
where, the upper part of it often alternates with indurated marl or limestone, or even with limestone, identical with the shell
limestone (muschelkalk), and with flinty concretions. Thus, at Ischel, the marly mass lies between the shell limestone (muschel-
kalk) and a series of marly and calcareous beds; between Klosternenburg, near Vienna, and Nussdorf, the undulated beds of
the deposit contain many limestones, which are here and there traversed by minute ferruginous veins, like the reniform marble
of Florence. After this short description, I imagine no one can any longer doubt the identity of this deposit with the red
marl. This formation fills up the valleys of the Alps, and forms only in the eastern part, and in the Carpathians, most ex-
tensive ranges of hills, like the Spessart. It is the gres houiller of Beudant, and of my former memoir.
As this deposit lies upon a very irregular surface, it forms, as elsewhere, many undulations, and affords the first origin of the
undulated stratification of the hills of shell limestone (jnusckellcaJk), which overlie this formation. The alpine shell limestone (muschelkalk) is a compact limestone, of a whitish, greyish,yellowish, brownish, and rarely blackish or reddish colour. It contains imbedded flinty concretions, and is traversed by many small veins of calcareous spar, which are generally totally different from those of the transition limestone, and the thin numerous veins of the magnesian limestone, in short, are analogous
to those of the shell limestone (muschelkalk). These rocks,which are in some few instances of a particular granular or
oolitic structure (roggenstein), afford marbles intermediate between the marbles of the transition limestone, and those of the
lias or Jura limestone. They contain many of the same fossils as the shell limestone (muschelkalk) of the north of Germany,
Ammonites, Modiola socialis, Nautili, Strombites, Turbinites, fragments of Echini, Madrepores, Tubipores, Alcyons, &c.
They form very high hills, composed of thin beds always stratified, which affords a good test to distinguish this limestone from
the magnesian, upon which it often lies in patches or hills. It abounds around the salt district, in Austria, Switzerland, Dau-
phine; in short, it is a part of the Alpine Limestone of authors. After this description, I need only add, that I see nothing in
it of the character of the lias or Jura limestone, as Mr Buckland calls this deposit. Its intimate connection with the salt
formation, its situation, its petrifactions, its nature, all shew that it is the shell-limestone formation (muschelkalk), so long neglected, and which now seems to occupy so conspicuous a place in nature. It is probable, that even a great part of the lime-
stone lying upon the Macigno, or variegated sandstone of the Middle Appennines, belongs to the shell limestone (mus-
chelkalk), and not to the Jura limestone. Yet, in contradicting in this manner so intelligent an observer as Buckland, I do not,
by any means, consider it impossible that some patches of the Jura formation may be situated near, or upon the Alps, in
some parts ^ but in Germany I do not know of any facts which shew the probability of this statement, and so long as Mr
Buckland is without a clear idea of the shell limestone (muschelkalk), and of its difference from the lias, at least in Ger-
many and France, he will probably hesitate as to the accuracy of my observations. His chief arguments are derived from the
petrifactions; but is it not very natural that the same terebratulae, or some other similar petrifactions, may exist both in the
shell-limestone (muschelkalk), and lias? and until he shew me in the alpine shell-limestone (muschelkalk), the Gryphites, the
Ichthyosauri, the Plagiostomata, and shew that it is unconnected with the salt deposit, I cannot adopt his ideas, which seem to
me inconsistent with nature.
After having described these different formations in their proper order, and removed the confusion which has arisen
from the neglect of the study of petrifactions, the ignorance of the true nature of the south-west part of Germany, and a false
analogy, I pass to the next alpine deposit. In Austria alone, there seem very probably to exist some patches of lias, and,
perhaps, of quadersandstein. The green sand, iron sand, and chalk are the next deposits. They are seen in Switzerland, in
Voralberg, in Allgau, and near Traunstein (See Uttinger and Lupin). These deposites present the same characters as in
France, excepting that they rise in hills to the height of 6000 feet above the level of the sea. A coarse quartzose sandstone
forms the lowest rock. After it, comes a green spotted, fine, and sometimes marly sandstone; then chloride white limestone,
and ferruginous sandstones, in which the globules of hydrate of iron are often abundant enough to be wrought (Sonthofen,
Kressenberg). With this last alternates a nummulitic brownish compact limestone, and then come above all some chloriiic
chalky limestoner and the greyish chalk marl. Some thin beds of clay, which are sometimes bituminous, are interstrati-
fied with these masses; even some few pieces of lignite and bitumen have been found in the ferruginous sandstone, and also rarely the same fossil resin as in France. Petrifactions are abundantly distributed in this formation, and can be referred to
twenty-two genera of Lamarck's shells, as Belemnites, Cones, Murices, &c. There are Ananchites, Serpulites, and crabs, as
in France and Hanover. Schlotheim has described nearly all these petrifactions as coming from Bergen and Coburg.
The great tertiary basin of Bavaria and Swabia presents
two regions, the Southern and the Northern. In the southern, the molasse, and nagelfluh limestone abound; and in the north-
ern, sandstone, and less quartzose nagelfluh, in which green particles are visible, and the formation is capped with a thm co-
vering of chloritose coarse marine limestone (Eckmuhl). In the south, the lower part of the molasse deposit is more compact
and calcareous, and in its upper part becomes more marly, and finer in the grain. Here and there are deposits of lignite
with palmacites; and fresh-water shells, Planorbes (Ammonites of Flurl), Lymneae, Mytili? Cyrenes, Anodonta, and Cerithia
like fresh-water univalves, have been deposited in cavities of the molasse, by alpine debacles of lakes and rivers.
Local deposits from the waters of springs, of Calcareous Tuff a, with many land and marsh shells, Lymneae, Planorbes, Helices,
Paludinae, are seen here and there, and seem to have been formed, in part, during the formation of the great alluvium
which covers the molasse, and forms especially the soil of the middle plains of Bavaria. Others are still forming, but they
do not present the particular stratified structure of these tuffas called travertino.
On comparing this deposit with that of Switzerland, we find that it is pretty similar; yet it wants the marine shelly molasse of
St Gallen, which evidently belongs to the coarse marine limestone, which exists itself at Lichtensteig, and between Solothurn
and Aarau; and, besides, in the southern part of Switzerland, there are marls with gypsum, which seem of a later date than
the molasse. Compared with the Austrian and Hungarian tertiary basin, this deposit appears of the same nature only in its
lower part, for the whole of the remaining parts of the deposit are wanting in Bavaria.
The classification of the Austrian deposits has proved a matter of much perplexity to those geologists who pay too great at-
tention to petrifactions; and they will be much astonished when they are informed, that, in the chalk, or perhaps newer Jura
limestone of the Leithagebirge, there exist imbedded (not in veins) bones of the mastodon. Nature often overturns
the most beautiful systems! Above this chalky deposit, alternating with some beds of arenaceous rocks or calcareous nagel-
fluhs, lies the plastic clay, with lignites and fresh-water shells; then comes the blue clay, with marine shells and bones of quadrupeds, as in the plastic clay, and which is as analogous to the coarse marine limestone of Paris, as to the London clay.
Above it, are some clay marls, with impressions of leaves belonging to genera of trees still existing in the country; then sand
without or with marine shells, and some few melanopsides, indicating a similarity to the Montmartre fresh-water gypsum depo-
sit; and after that, sand, marl, and marine coarse limestone, corresponding to the upper marine sand of Paris, and fresh-water
spring deposits here and there upon hillocks (see Prevost).
Geologists, who classify this deposit in a different manner, because bones of quadrupeds are only found at Paris above it,
commit the same error as those observers who take a small corner of the earth for an immutable geological type. Each parti-
cular basin has its own peculiarities: this is an axiom in transition, in secondary, and still more in tertiary deposits.
I intend to finish this memoir by a view of the changes which have taken place in the waters of the Bavarian basin.
The following are the conclusions at which I have arrived.
That country formed, at one time, with Switzerland, the Rhine-Valley, and Austria, part of the immense sea which communicated
with the Northern Sea, and the Mediterranean. After the deposition of the chalk formation, this sea became an inland sea, and no longer communicated with the Mediterranean, or at least only by a channel or subterraneous passage. But this sea, which ex-
tended at first to Hungary, has been insensibly separated from the Hungarian and Austrian Basin, and from that of the Rhine
and of Switzerland; its saline contents have continually diminished; it has at length become a fresh water lake; its level has
insensibly decreased by the deepening of the channel which conveyed its waters to the sea; and, at last, this lake has been con-
verted into a plain with many lakes and islands. The lake has nearly emptied itself; the streams of water of the different basins
have sometimes entirely changed their direction, as in the Rhine-Valley; the rivers have begun to occupy their bed nearly as at
present; and the original warm climate, through different physical causes, has become temperate. Alluvial matters accumu-
lated in Bavaria from south to north, have given rise to a great many of the changes in the currents of the water at different epochs.
