In the general view of the Orography of European Turkey, communicated in the preceding volumes of this Journal, I could only enter into a few details regarding Servia, Macedonia, and some parts of Romelia and Maesia Superior. Last year, however, I visited the other provinces of the empire, and directed my attention especially to the eastern and western ranges of mountains, the Haemus, and the Albanian-Bosnian chains; whilst I endeavoured, at the same time, to complete my knowledge of the central chains, from the Dardanelles to the Adriatic. I now possess nearly 350 barometrical measurements, with corresponding observations made at Belgrade by Mr Math. Ivanowitsch, apothecary; and I have also obtained a great deal of interesting information from being able to converse with the Turks, as well as the Servians and Bulgarians.
  To the north of the central plateau ofMcesia, between Pristina and Sophia, the limits of Servia are formed from E. to W. by the Jastrebacz (or chain of the sparrow-hawks), the Plocsa, and the Kopaonik. The first-named mountains are only covered by oaks, and higher up by elms, like the hills in central Servia; but these latter have fir trees near their summits. The greatest elevation of this chain appears to be rather above 5500 feet. The Jastrebacz is a mass of crystalline (primary) slaty rocks, whilst the others consist of transition-slates, with syenite, diallage-rock, serpentine, and metalliferous deposits, such as magnetic iron-ore, &c. South of Maisia Superior is the Orbelus, if we may be allowed to apply this ancient name to the KurbetshaPfanina, a pretty large group of hills, situated at the sources of the Bistritza, and having an absolute height of between 4000 and 5000 feet. To the west and east of the Orbelus, there are some pretty low chains clothed with oaks, and forming the northern frontier of Macedonia, from Uskup to Dubnitza and Sophia. These hills are chiefly composed of talcose or micaceous slates, and scarcely attain an elevation of more than 3000 feet: they are sometimes still lower to the west of Kostendil, where they partly consist of transition-limestone, and even tertiary molasse. The Orbelus is a massive mountain of granitic rocks with gneiss; and in its vicinity we find trachytes, which are in connexion with those of Karatova. Trachyte also extends across the low central chain, from Strazin in Macedonia, to the vicinity of Vranja south of the Morava. A sulphureous hot spring issues at the northern extremity of these hills.
  On the eastern limits of Mwsia Superior, south of Nisha, are situated the lofty Start Planina (old mountain), and the SuvoPlanina (dry hill); these limestone ridges occur next to the micaslates of Baditschka-Gora (east of Leskovatz). A very extensive group of mica-slate and talc-slate hills rises more to the south, between the Morava valley and the valleys of Trn and Sukova. On the north-east base of this group we find some trachytes and trachytic conglomerates; but, on the highly inclined southern declivity, porphyry dykes occur in the slates; whilst some of the hill tops are composed of trachyte and a white trachytic aggregate. Here, as in the Servian hills, elms cover the low plateaux, oaks the sides, and alpine pasturages occupy the highest summits, the chief of which is the broad Snegpol (Snowfield). This last is a little higher than the Slari-Planina, and attains an elevation of nearly 4000 (Paris) feet.
The Snegpol is united by the ridges above the village of Klissura (defile), to the Kurbetska Planina and the hills of Egri Palanka. The talc-slates, of which these are formed, are often decomposed, and contain numerous microscopic crystals of magnetic iron-ore, which is washed and smelted in many places. These hills completely separate the upper Morava valley from that of Trn, whose stream flows into the Sukova and Nissava; a fact of which most geographers are ignorant, as they make it fall into the Morava.
  To the south-east of this group of hills we find lower ridges composed of limestone and newer transition-slate, or Silurian rocks, with numerous defiles or rents running nearly N-S. These hills extend to the great longitudinal channel which leads from Nisha to Sophia, and which is excavated, particularly towards the east, in a conchiferous limestone, probablv belonging to the Jura formation. All the above-mentioned chains are inhabited by a pretty dense population of industrious Bulgarians.
Lastly, to the west of the plateau of Mazsia lies the Pristina or Kossova plain, surrounded by low chains, which are elevated about 800 or 1000 feet above it, whilst its own absolute height amounts to 1400 feet. The hills are chiefly composed of talc or mica slates, together with some serpentines and amygdaloidal limestones: they are covered with forests, chiefly of oak, of which the principal varieties are Quercus Robur, Q. Cerris, and Q.pubescens.
  The middle plateau of Mcesia is occupied by hills a little higher than the preceding, and containing valleys or basins formed by the Morava, the Toplitza, and their defiles. Here the Bulgarians cultivate their fields and gardens in a most admirable manner. The valleys are covered with villages, where maps only indicate a wilderness, and the cultivated fields extend far up among the hills. Unfortunately, however, their neighbours the Arnautes, or Albanians inhabiting the N.W. of Miesia superior, do not profit by their good example, but leave much of their ground in its primitive state of woody wilderness. Vines do not grow well in the Morava valley, except around Nisha, Leskovatz, Vranja, Prekop (Urkup), and also near Pristina. Indian corn is cultivated in the lower Bulgarian and Albanian valleys. The high mountainous ridges of Servia serve as a protection against the north winds.
  The Morava valley is composed of tertiary beds of an argillaceous or sandy nature, as near Nisha and Leskovatz : alluvial beds occur higher up, in the Vranja basin. Nisha, Leskovatz, and Vranja are the chief towns of the three basins, of which the narrowest parts are at Kurvihan, and to the south of Leskovatz between that town and Surdebitza. Some trachytic eruptions have taken place to the south-east of Leskovatz, and siliceous limestone, probably of fresh water origin, occurs to the north-east, near Sheshine, at the foot of the hills to the east of the Morava.
Between Radomir (at an elevation 1614 feet on the eastern side of the Strymon), Bresnik, and Sophia, is a very extensive plateau, nine miles broad, and composed of tertiary augite porphyry. The higher summits of the hills attain an altitude of 2456 feet. To the south rises the mountain calledWistoska or Wistosh, with its limestones, slaty and granitic rocks, argentiferous ores, and abundant springs. Its height may be estimated at above 4000 feet. To the west it overtops the bare hilly country around Radomir, and to the east the beautiful plain of Sophia, which has only an elevation of 1348 feet.
The great Isker (fiomela or beuk Isker) flows through the basin of that name, enters into the mountain denies of Sumughu Balkan, and only leaves the hilly country six or nine miles to the south of Wratza near Butunia. Geographers have confounded in a singular manner the great Isker with the little Isker (Malo or Kutschuk Isker). This last river comes down the Balkan north of the Ichtiman basin, and joins the great Isker not far from Staro Celo. Etropol, Strigl (the Striga of maps), Tashkisi, and Komartzi, are on the little Isker, and not on the great, as marked in the maps, in which also the bed of the little Isker between Etropol and Starocelo is erroneously delineated as a part of that of the great Isker. The great Isker valley is the chief military highway from Bulgaria to Servia, but that of the little Isker only leads to a pretty high ridge of hills, which must be crossed before descending to the Sophia basin or to that of the Ichtiman, which is situated a little higher up, at an elevation of 1480 feet. The small Isker does not join the Sophia basin.
The hills of Southern Maesia are united geographically to the Despotodagh, the Rhodopus, and the Balkan or Haemus by means of the Wistoska,together with some granitic and sienitic hills at the base of the Rhodopus, and three or four low ridges running west 2° south to east 2° north, in an oblique direction from Banja to Ichtiman, between the Rhodopus and the Haemus. These last are composed of mica-slate, gneiss, and granite, with some granular limestones, and their height is from 2000 to 2356 feet. At the base of the Despotodagh they are crossed by the Kiz Derbend (defile of the girl) running W-E., and composed at its narrowest part of granular limestone. The road from Tatar Basardschik to Banja is carried along it. We must take care not to confound this defile with one of the same name, but much finer, in the Rhodopus between Rasluk and Newrokop. In the latter there are the ruins of an ancient castle, situated on high rocks, which overhang an old road a thousand feet above the torrent. The passage of this deep defile occupies nine hours, and all around appears a chaos. At Somakov the alluvial soil is full of microscopic particles of magnetic iron-ore; there are several founderies, and the Pasha of Sophia has built one after an English plan.
The Balkan or Haemus extends from Sophia to Cape Eminek, and runs W. 3°, N. to E. 8°, S. or, by compass, nearly W.NW., E.SE. It is a much lower chain than the Despotodagh; the southern slopes are generally very steep, but, on the northern side, it is only the highest ridge which presents considerable inclinations. The Balkan is almost destituteof subordinate chains towards the south ; and is composed of the principal high ridge, and a series of parallel lower ones which diminish in height as they approach the Danube. Between these are large longitudinal valleys; and we occasionally find rents from north to south intersecting the ridges, and occupied, as in the Alps, by the great rivers that issue from the longitudinal valleys. As the chain diminishes in height from west to east, the high Balkan (Kodja Balkan) forms the western part, at the sources of the Osma, where the summits probably attain an elevation of above 4000 feet; whilst, near the Black Sea, they have only a height of from 1800 to 2000 feet. There is an oblique and pretty high ridge to the west of Czatak and Bashkoe, which separates the waters of the Bebrova from those of the Akali-Komtschik. The eastern part of the Balkan is pretty well delineated in the Austrian map of Turkey, published at Vienna.
The high Balkan is composed of the crystalline slaty rocks, gneiss, mica-slate, talc and clay slates; these extend beyond Tschipka on the southern side, but their breadth diminishes from west to east. Above Islivne (which we find wrong placed and under the name of Selimnoon maps), near the middle of the Balkan, there are some very picturesque hills of quartziferous porphyry; and among these the peaks of the Tschataldagh (rent hill) rise to the height of 2800 feet, thus affording a most beautiful view of Romelia. Islivne is a most delightful station for a naturalist: it is a Turkish town with 15,000 inhabitants, and has, along with Usundschova, the greatest annual fair in Romelia. I may remark that Tschirmen, near Usundschova, is on the southern and not on the northern side of the Maritza river.
Immediately above these older rocks of the Balkan we find a thick formation of green sand, composed of marly greyish sandstones, quartzose and greenish-coloured sandstones, and beds of marly clay and whitish, greyish, or black compact limestone. The latter rock is often conchiferous as at Wikrar, where some of the beds contain oysters, pectens, naticae, turbinated shells, cariophylleae, and other coralline bodies. In some cases orbitolites occur in great numbers, as near Loftdscha. The limestone forms thick beds, and occasionally craggy precipices; but the other rocks, with the exception of some of the green sandstones, only form hills, which are generally either covered with oaks and elms, or, being destitute of trees, are used as pasture grounds. The beds of the lowest cretaceous formation are not exactly parallel to the general direction of the Balkan, but appear to intersect it at a very acute angle, deviating a little to the south. The general dip is nearly N.NE.; but the undulations of certain masses often causes the dip to change to the S.W., N.W., &c.
  At the eastern extremity of the Balkan, the green-sand is covered by extensive plateaux of chalk, with flints and belemnites. Chalk appears on all sides when it is not covered by the vegetation. Schumla is a good place for seeing the transition from the uppermost green-sand to the chloritic chalk with its fossils, the Grypheae (G. auricularis, G. vesiculosa), Inoceramus (/. sulcatus), Pecten, Lima, Tercbratula, Gucullea, Nerina, Natica, Cellepora, Flustra, Galerites, &c.; and also the transition from this last to the chalk with its characteristic fossils, the striated terebratulae, shark's teeth, &c. The beds around Schumla are in an anticlinal position, and the town occupies the centre of the convexity or rent. By the aid of a little imagination it might be regarded as a crater of elevation, in which are deposits of tertiary clay, forming towards the east the natural double ramparts in the semicircular form of the town. On the other side it is inclosed by chalk hills, upon which a citadel and redoubts have been erected, in order to prevent the approach of enemies from the plateau. These chalk hills have been delineated by geographers as advanced portions of the Balkans; but certainly they ought not to convert mere small hills into chains of mountains.
  If one might be allowed to judge from the inclined position of the Molasse near Islivne, it would appear that the uprising of the Harnius was posterior to the deposition of the superior tertiary rocks; whilst the horizontal beds of tertiary sand on the central plateau of Maesia would indicate an older epoch of formation for the hills of that country.
  In the vicinity of the Danube, Bulgaria is covered with a great tertiary formation, which becomes broader as we proceed from east to west, in consequence of the oblique direction of the cretaceous beds in Bulgaria. This direction was owing to their having been deposited upon the jurassic limestone of the Pashaliks of Widdin and Nisha, and on the crystalline slaty rocks of the Balkan. The Danube flows past a series of small hills on the Bulgarian side; but, on the northern or Wallachian side, the country is flat. A great part of north-east Bulgaria and the country of the Dobrutscha Cossacks is tertiary. It is only near Babadagh, and between it and Matochin, that we find higher hills composed of older formations, particularly clay-slate. Loss or alluvial clay-marl occurs along the Danube. Erratic blocks are unknown in Bulgaria, as is the case with the other portions of Turkey which I have examined.
The isthmus between Rassova and Kostendsche, where a canal might be cut in order to shorten the voyage of the Danube, is not only occupied by alluvial matter, but also by some very low tertiary hills; the Danube can never have had its channel there in historical times.
South of the Balkan there exists only one pretty distant subordinate chain, viz., the low chain of transition-slate and limestone between Kalofer (west of Kezanlik), Eski Sagra, and a place west of Islivne, where the Tondja issues through a defile from its superior alluvial basin. This basin is the plain which extends between Tschipka, Kezanlik, and Czirkua, and it is on it that the roses are cultivated for making the attar of roses. The Vienna map delineates the course of the Tondja pretty well; but in Cotta's map it is very ill laid down.
From Islivne to Burgas on the Black Sea, there is a vast hollow at the base of the Balkan; the rivers are only separated by very small ridges. The remainder of the Balkan bounds the western part of the great tertiary gulf, whose surface forms the present soil of a great portion of eastern Romelia or Thracia.
The southern base of the Haemus is remarkable for the exuberance of its vegetation, consisting of gardens of roses, jasmine, and wild lilac, vineyards and forests of all kinds of fruit trees, but without the olive tree, the AnisoT the Lepleb (a kind of Doliehos labial). Tschipka, Eski-Sagra, and Islivne, are truly delightful abodes. The adjacent plain, however, is destitute of trees, and consists chiefly of fields under cultivation, and pasture-grounds which are partly marshy, with a black soil. This alluvial and tertiary plain extends to the chain which runs along the Black Sea, as also the Sea of Marmora and the Archipelago. On its elevated borders near Eski-Sagra, there are some small deposits of fresh-water limestone. Primary alluvial matter fills up the angle of the basin between the Rhodopus and the Balkan, and it is on this spot that rice is chiefly cultivated. In other parts, the shores of this tertiary gulf have been covered by fossiliferous and coralline limestones, clay, sand, and sandstones; as along the sea of Marmora at Constantinople, around Kirklisse, between that town and Bunar-Hissar, between Serai, Tschataltscha, and Tschorlu, &c. The reddish-brown smectic clay, from which the Turkish pipes are manufactured without being exposed to the fire, also belongs to the tertiary formation, and is probably derived from granitic or recent igneous rocks. This clay occurs in the basin of Adrianople, as well as near Rutschuk in Bulgaria, near Sophia, at Komavitza near Nisha, &c. The best pipes are made at Belgrade, Nisha, Sophia, Rutschuk, Adrianople, Lule-Burgas, and Silivri.
  In the Plain north of Adrianople, we occasionally meet with small groups of isolated hills composed of trachyte, as between Jeni-Sagra and Janboli, and near Karabunar. In the northeast portion of the tertiary basin of Romelia, the augite porphyry forms a very extensive undulatingplateau; extending from the base of the Balkan, north of Aidos, to the Gulf of Burgas, and in a southerly direction to a different Karabunar (blackfountain) situated on the Curu. In the wild and wooded country between Aidos and Burgas, there is a hot sulphureous spring, which is probably connected in some way with the focus of the eruptions, which formerly occurred in an ancient gulf between the Balkan and the chain on thesouthern shores of the Black Sea.
This last chain is not in immediate connection with the Haemus; but, speaking geographically, is only a continuation of the chain at Eski Sagra. The great valley of the Tondja separates the low mountains north of Jeni-Sagra from the plateaux, composed of slates and blackish limestone, between Karabunar and Fakhi. To the south-east, the slates have been broken through by great masses of diorite and granite; and this latter, along with gneiss, predominates between Petschiomale and Kirklisse, and even farther to the east. The diorites chiefly occur in the neighbourhood of Fakhi, and seem to be veins in the granite. North of Kirklisse, the decomposition of the granitic rocks has produced fantastic shapes, and given rise to the formation of rocking stones, &c. On approaching the Bosphorus, the shore-chain is divided into a number of small hills situated on low-lyingplateaux. Near Serai, we find clayslates which extend to the Bosphorus, and alternate with greywacke and silurian shell-limestone, as near Therapia, and at the Giant's Mountain in Asia. To the north of Bujukdere there is a small trachytic district.
Geographers call my shore-chain Strandsia Balkan and Kutschuk Balkan; but the first name is unknown in the country, and is only that of a village south-east of Serai; whilst the second is a general denomination given by the Turks to all small hills. This chain is marked on maps as uniting with the Balkan between Karnabat and Islivne; but, at the distance of only three miles eastfrom Islivne-, the waters, issuing from the wooded valleys of the Balkan, flow towards the Black Sea, A channel could be cut from Islivne to Burgas. Islivne is near the point where the waters flow in opposite directions, to the Archipelago and the Black Sea, indeed it is only separated by a small hill from the waters which flow in an easterly direction.
The Rhodopus does not extend to the Dardanelles as all maps indicate. Like the Perindagh, the mountains above Rasluk, and those of the famous Kiz-Derbend, its highest summits are situated towards the west, viz. to the south of Banja, Samakov, and Dubnitza. These attain an elevation of 8000 feet, and perhaps some of those which I did not ascend are still higher. The chain gradually diminishes in height from west to east, and terminates rather abruptly about five leagues from the Maritza, and six leagues south-west of Adrianople. The declivities on the northern side are generally pretty steep; and magnificent views of this portion of the Rhodopus are obtained from Philippopolis and Banja. Tine trees occur highest up on the hills, next to them are elms, and lower down, the oak forests. A certain number of rents running north-south form deep valleys, which are adorned with monasteries (Stanimak) and villages or cottages. These fissures are the passes by which people cross the mighty wall from Philoppopolis, Tatar-Basardschik, Banja, Samakov, and Dubnitza. Along the Archipelago, the lofty crags, the island of Tassos with its marbles, as well as the high Semedrek, all indicate that the crystalline slates, the gneiss, the granite, and the granular limestone of the Despotodagh or Rhodopus have experienced considerable depressions, as, otherwise, the chain would be united to the old ridges of the Troja country and the Ida. Some isolated portions of the Rhodopus are found in the northern tertiary plain, as, for instance, the hills of gneiss and granite between Harinani and Haskoe. At Philippopolis, sienite forms four small hillocks in the town, or close to it: this formation is connected with the granitic eruptions from west to east at the base of the Rhodopus, to the west and east of Samakov, and at Dubnitza.
From the Archipelago to beyond Karabunar (south of Dimotika) there is a long stripe running south-north of trachyte and trachytic conglomerate.Here one finds all the compact, semivitrified, and vitreous varieties of these igneous masses which made their appearance during the tertiary epoch. These eruptions must be connected on the one side with those north of Adrianople, and on the other with those of the high island of Semedrek. In this latter, as also to the east of Fered, there is a hot sulphureous spring. On the northern base of the Rhodopus, hornblendic trachytes are found in some parts of the Semisdsche valley. The trachytic country is partly a stony barren soil, and partly covered with low trees of the Paliurus aculeatus.It is only fertile where the conglomerates are in connexion with the tertiary argillaceous-calcareous beds.
South of Edrene (Adrianople), between the Maritza and the Dardanelles, are the low ridges and plateaux of the Tekirdagh. In these, Molasse is associated with clay and a sand which occasionally contains shells, together with numerous fragments of siliceous coniferous (?) wood. One bed, at the height of 800 feet, is chiefly composed of shells of the genus mactra. Coralline and shelly limestones are found on the sands of Malgara, and particularly on the western banks of the Maritza, near the trachytic zone around Fered. The greatest height of the Tekirdagh may amount to nearly 900 feet. To the south-east of Aimadtschik, there is a somewhat more elevated ridge, which, in the vicinity of the Sea of Marmora, is probably 300 or 400 feet higher than the Tekirdagh. It is improperly called Kagridagh in the Vienna map.
  It would appear that, during the epoch of the deposition of the middle and superior tertiary rocks, the sea did not pass through the Dardanelles, as this rent did not then exist; but that the great sea of Marmora and Adrianople communicated with the Archipelago by means of a vast firth situated more to the west, and of which the deepest part is now occupied by the large and fertile valley of the Maritza. Near Constantinople also, the tertiary limestones and superior sands do not occur beyond the mountains of greywacke and slate south of the Black Sea, although it is probable that tertiary waters existed in the cavities between the groups of the chain running along the Black Sea. The rents of the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus were formed at a later period, during the alluvial epoch; as appears from the craggy declivities of their banks, the correspondence of the beds on both sides, and the absence of any very old alluvium. I do not suppose that Andreossy's opinion is supported by any geologist, as there are no traces of fluviatile or marine erosion on the banks of these straits.
  To the west of the central plateau of Maesia is Upper Albania, a country occupied to the east and south-east by the high Tschar, (not Tschardagh, which is an Asiatic hill on the Sea of Marmora), between Kacsanik, Kalkandel, and Prisrend; and to the south by its prolongation, consisting of the high ridges interposed between the wild primary valley of the Debres and the plain of Bitoglia (Monastir) and Perlepe, as also the valley of Kalkandel, called Tetovo in the Bulgarian language. They are sometimes more than 8000 feet high, and are occasionally capped with snow during summer. These ridges are immense masses of crystalline slates, which, in the Tschar, become talcose or argillaceous, and contain whole hills of compact or semi-granular limestone. As an example I may mention the high and massive Taleshdagh, the Galitza of maps, nearly 6000 feet in height, at the eastern entrance of the black Drin. The hills behind Prisrend and its old Servian castle are also calcareous, and abound in fine springs. The roads through the Tschar from Prisrend to Kalkandel, and from Prisrend to Kacsanik, are very interesting from the beautiful views which they command—valleys with lofty crags, ruins of castles and monasteries, and villages scattered among high declivities.
  To the west of these ridges, and rising to an average height of 6000 or 7000 feet, are the primary mountains of Elbessan, through which passes the only military road from Romelia or Monastir to Scutari. It is carried through Ochri, where the vineyards indicate that the elevation of the lake of Ochrida is under 2000 feet; it may, however, be estimated at 1500 or 1600 feet. More to the south we meet with the northern extremities of the primary Pindus with parallel limestone ridges like those of the Tschar.
  To the north of these chains, all of which, with the exception of the Tschar, run from north-west to south-east, there have been immense eruptions of Diorite, compact Euphotide and Serpentine, and among these we find all the compact, lamellar, sienitic, decomposed, and earthy varieties of the ophite of the Pyrenees. Diallage-rock occurs rarely, but forms some magnificent masses and small hills in this deposit around the torrent of Rape, thirty miles east of Scutari. These igneous rocks contain considerable masses of clay-slate, &c., through which they have been upheaved, and which they have altered and indurated in various ways. Whole rocks and mountains are composed of red and greenish jaspers, and these pass into the slate from which they have been formed, as in Italy, by igneous agency. This singularly intersected and barren district includes all the mountains between the confluence of the black and white Drins, and the place where they issue from the calcareous rent six miles from Scutari, comprehending a tract sixty-six miles from west to cast, and nearly fifteen miles from north to south. The height of these hills does not seem to be above 3300 feet: some of their summits are covered with pines and fir trees, as is particularly the case with the Kiafa-mala (hill of Kiafa), near Viet. The coniferous trees descend to the elevation of 1500 feet, and the forests lower down are composed of elms and oaks.
This country, which bears some resemblance to a sea agitated by a storm, is the native place of the Myrdites (not Myrmides), a race of Catholic Albanians who extend from Scutari to beyond Takova, and from the Debres to Prisrend and Alessio. Their captain, Doda, resides at Oros; and he can assemble together at least 10,000 armed men. These poor people dispute with the torrents the ground necessary for cultivating their Turkish corn; and they conceal their villages as much as possible from their enemies the Turks. The deep rents in which the Drill flows through the dioritic and calcareous hills are seldom well adapted for roads, but one has been made between Prisrend and Scutari, along three valleys and two mountain defiles running nearly west-east. Old pavements and bridges shew that this road had been used in ancient times; but, although it is crowded with horses carrying goods from Trieste into Turkey, it is at present only a footpath, and scarcely practicable for riding. This road abounds in precipices, steep ascents and descents, flights of steps cut in the rock (called Skale in Albanian), and passes excavated in the rock and too narrow for horses. It is ninety-six miles in length, and during the whole distance, the traveller meets with scarcely a single village, although a dozen isolated inns indicate at least as many hidden villages at a distance from the road.
These dioritic hills are connected geographically with the high and calcareous ridges of the lower Drin, which are only the extremities of the very high similar chains between Ipek or Scherkoles and the country of Montenegro. Their greyishwhitesummits covered with eternal snow, except towards the east, and their numerous rents, recall to one's mind the secondary calcareous chains of the Alps. Around the lake of Plava, from which the Bojana issues, near Gusinie above Plava, and a little to the east of that, their elevation probably exceeds 8000 feet. Their lower declivities are covered with villages; for the Albanian, like the inhabitant of Montenegro, seeks liberty and exemption from taxes in the wildest abodes; whilst the Turk bestows on him the epithet of Haiduk, rebel and highway robber.
These serrated ridges are connected with the Kom and Dormitor, two high chains to the east and west of Drobniak (the Drobnasche of maps), as also with the Lubitschnia; all of which are limestone hills capped with snow, and at least as high as the former ones. Farther north, these chains are united to those east of Glubigne, between Mostar and Novaschin in Herzegowina. It is the Bielosok of the Vienna map.
The maps place Plava and the neighbouring snowy chains too far from the Drin and Scutari, and too much to the east; besides, the Albanian names are ill spelt, and there are numerous errors in the position of inns and villages between Prisrend and Scutari.
  It is possible that the eruptions of diorite and serpentine, in the country called myrdita, may be contemporaneous with one of the latest upheavings of the chains last mentioned; and that Bosnia received, during that epoch, its present form, which may be compared to a roof sloping from south to north.
The cretaceous formation, with hippurites, compact limestone, and marly sandstone, &c., occurs in the superior tertiary basin of the White Drin, north and east of Takova; but this basin, which is at an elevation of 1000 or 1100 feet, is separated from the alluvium of Scutari by a very thick wall of diorite, serpentine, and limestone; and from this the Drin issues with great velocity at Scale, at six miles east of Scutari. The inferior chalk is found on the coasts of Albania, where it occurs, as in southern Europe, in the form of singularly shaped hills of limestone, which is much more frequently compact, like that of the Jura, than fossiliferous or earthy. This chalk is distributed over Dalmatia and part of Herzegowina, and forms numerous high hills around the bay of Cattaro. It extends to Montenegro, where its rocks are so numerous as materially to impede the cultivation of the country; and the superabundant population make use of this as a pretext for committing robberies on their neighbours, whether Mahometans, Catholics, or even Servians of the Greek Church. These robberies are the more horrible, from the circumstance that the robbers always carry away with them the heads of their victims, in order to serve as a trophy and obtain a remuneration from their bishop or chief. This latter personage often pays reluctantly, and offers remonstrances; but all to no purpose, as his power is limited. The Pasha of Scutari is also obliged to reward those who bring him heads from Montenegro, a thing which happens almost every day. The only vineyards in Montenegro are those near the Lake of Scutari, along the Moratscha (Moracca of maps), and near Bielopavltzi.
The cretaceous system forms all the hills around Scutari; the lake of which contains some rocky islands of limestone. The Scutari basin is so much protected from the northern winds, that the heat is very oppressive during summer; but the climate is, on this account, favourable for the growth of Mediterranean plants, such as the pomegranate and orange tree. The olive tree also occurs there; but its true native country commences more to the south at Durazzo. Owing to the quantity of stagnant water, fevers are common in Scutari during summer.
  At Scale, on the Drin, the cretaceous limestone is compact, apparently without fossils, and of a yellow or greyish white colour. Similar characters are observable in the limestone forming the hills east of Scutari. At the base of these hills there are numerous villages and vineyards, whose green tint forms a strong contrast to the grey barren rocks. To the east of Alessio, the same limestone forms conical hills like those of Antivari, north of Scutari. More to the south, they extend east of Durazzo to Berat. The acroceraunian or chimerian chain, with its sandstones, belongs to the same formation, which probably crosses over to the Ionian isles, and along the coast to Prevesa. These mountains exhibit frequent examples of natural fires, similar to that of the pietra mala in the Appenines. The limestone ridges around Janina appear to be older, and analogous to those of the Pindus and the Tschar.
Large springs, issuing like rivers out of the rock, occur in this formation, as in the older limestone districts. In Montenegro, the Czernojevich issues as a river from the chalk at the distance of one and a half leagues north of the Lake of Scutari. Cettigne is situated in a dry valley, and the only torrents are those near Genognussi; but the waters quickly disappear under ground, a fact of which geographers are not aware. On the other hand, to the east of Ipek, the Istok issues as a torrent from a subterranean channel in the old limestone; and the White Drin makes its appearance as a river from under a limestone crag at the distance of one and a half miles above Novo Celo, six miles east of Ipek. Geographers, induced probably by the similarity of names, have marked this Drin as having its origin at Rosalia, a village on the Bosnian side of the chain, and on one of the higher branches of the Drina in Bosnia. Besides, the position of Rosalia is wrong; as it is too much to the west, or Ipek too much to the east. The high plateau of Nikshichi (Niskiki of maps), in Herzegowina, has no lakes, but only caverns or katavotrons, in which the water loses itself, and which may occasionally overflow after long rains.
Bosnia is an immense plateau inclined from south to north, and presenting to the Albanian plain of Ipek, and the hills of Myrdita, a limestone wall from 6000 to 7000 feet high. It requires four or five hours to ascend to the plateau. To the west, Bosnia is bounded in a similar manner by the snowy chain east of Mostar, and the Kom west of Kolaschin and east of Drobniak. Thus Mostar is another Nice, protected towards the north, and surrounded with gardens of pomegranate, olive, and orange trees, rising in terraces one above another,—a fertile oasis in the stony calcareous soil of Herzegowina. Towards Servia, the plateau of Bosnia also descends very abruptly, especially to the north-east; but to the southeast it is connected with the Servian hills near Uschitze, and on the banks of the Ibar.
We may travel for many miles on level ground on the highest and most southerly plateau of Bosnia: occasionally we meet with small valleys or small basins, the sites of former lakes, as the plain north of Ugrlo. From this, the most elevated plateau, all the ridges diminish in height towards the north, and run S.E.-N.W., so that they form a slightly inclined plain so far as the Save. The highest ridges run parallel to the Kom and Dormitor, &c., in Herzegowina, but have only half or two-thirds the altitude of these mountains, or of those near Plava. They diminish in height in a direction from west to east. Geographers are right in marking an oblique chain, higher than the others, between Bosnia and Herzegowina. If we imagine, in this inclined surface of the ridges, deep furrows running, some S.E.-N.W., or from south to north, and others from west to east, we have a configuration similar to that of Bosnia, with its chains running S.E.-N.W., or S.SE.-N.NW. These last, however, anastomose by lower ramifications running W.-E.; so that the small plains and valleys, where towns or villages are situated, are inclosed by walls running S.E.-N.W., and by low ridges running W.-E. Here, as in the Alps and the Balkan, rents running N.-S. give issue to the great rivers, which thus find their way out of the longitudinal valleys.
This natural citadel is only connected with Turkey by the broken part of the high walls above Novibazar (Jenibazar) and Ipek; and with Scutari or Maritime Albania by two or three mountain-passes which are still higher, and are rendered dangerous owing to the snows above the Plava Lake, and the precipices which occur for nine miles on the bank of the Zem. These last passes lead to Zienitza and Bielopol. If Montenegro were a quiet country, the Turks, when going to Bosnia, might ascend the Moracca river, or cross Montenegro and the high plains of Herzegowina.
Bosnia, that beautiful Servian-Mahometan Switzerland, is a cold country, whose hills are covered with firs, pine trees, and birches. The plants chiefly cultivated are, barley, oats, Polygonum Jagopyrum, rye, potatoes, hemp, flax, and plum trees for making brandy. Turkish corn does not grow well, except in the deep sheltered valleys, as north of Sexajevo (Bosna Serai) ; and vineyards only occur near the banks of the Save, at Brod, and at Banjaluka, &c. On the southern higher ridges of Bosnia there is, below the forest of fir and pine trees, a zone of elms, which rises to the height of 3800 feet on the southern declivity; oaks occur lower down, and, on the borders of the Albanian low country, there are chestnut trees and vineyards.
Bosnia, like Central and Western Servia and a part of Croatia, is entirely composed of my primary formations (the ironsition ones of authors), and particularly of the older and medial divisions. The chief rocks are clay-slates, of a grey or red colour, greywacke, conglomerate, compact limestone, sometimes intersected by spathose veins and reddish or whitish sandstones (Pratza, &c.). The immense calcareous masses form lofty and picturesque crags, as along the Verbas, south of Banjaluka, and between Serajevo and Pratza. In other places they form subalpine valleys of great beauty, as that of the Lirn, near Priepol, that of Millscheda or Miloscheveda, between Zienitza and Priepol, &c. We occasionally find deep calcareous defiles on the banks of the great rivers, as on the Drina south of Zwornik, on the Jadar near the castle of Kizlar, and on the Bosna. The Gothic castles of Hissar (south of Priepol), Kizlar, Vranduk, Zwornik, &c. are situated on the tops of rocks or on craggy walls in these defiles. The calcareous plateaux offer many small funnel-shaped hollows, resembling the combes of the Jura. The limestone is often fossiliferous, containing encrinites, terebratulae, pectens, &c.; and it is probable that many Silurian fossils will be discovered in it.
The slates of Bosnia are intersected, as in Western Servia, by masses of sienite, sienitic porphyry, and felspar porphyry, as in the Vrt valley, near Tschainitza. Serpentine and Schaalsiein occur near Kizlar and in other places. In the vicinity of these igneous rocks, and especially near the first mentioned, are the silver ores of Crebernitza. The gold of Slatibor (hill of gold), near Uschitze, has probably a similar position. There are rich iron mines in limestone at Maidan, in the neighbourhood of Banjaluka, and at Foinitza, near Serajevo; and in these, sparry iron and brown iron-ores occur. The chief founderies are near Bosna-Serai, from whence a great quantity of iron goods are sent into Turkey. It is said that gold was formerly obtained by washing the sand on the Bosnia.
The compact slightly fossiliferous limestone of the hills and plateaux near Albania, distinctly alternates in certain localities with varieties of clay-slate, and even with reddish coloured sandstones, as at Mount Glieb. It would, therefore, be advisable for the present, to class these beds, or at least those limestones which are at a distance from Montenegro, among the newer transition-formations. Future travellers will be able to fix the exact limits between these and the Mediterranean chalk, and also to decide on the presence or absence of Jurassic rocks; as there will be much less difficulty in conducting these inves- /tigations, when the country becomes more cultivated, and the inhabitants more civilized.
The tertiary formation is not found in the great hollows of the plateau of Bosnia; it only occurs towards the north, as a border of low hills, occasionally covered with inconsiderable forest3 of oak. These hills form a distinct separation between the higher and older chains, and the great plains, south of the Save, which abound in oak forests. They can be traced from Schabatz, in Servia, to Losnitza, and thence to Brod and Dubitza, on the upper Save. In Servia, on the contrary, the tertiary hills stretch far up in the great valleys as from Schabatz to Vallievo, and on the eastern bank of the Kolubara. They consist of the same rocks as in Hungary, clay and sand alternating with shelly or coralline limestone, which is often of a white colour; in short of the medial and superior divisions of the tertiary series. Near the Save there is loss or alluvial calcareous clay; and we find, deposited on its banks, numerous trees which have been floated down by the rivers in Bosnia.
The mineral waters, noticed by me this year (1837), were chiefly hot sulphureous springs, as near Aidos, on the Tondja, nine miles east of Kezanlik, at Sophia; at Banja, on the base of the Rhodopus; at the curious Batak-banese (boggy bath), occurring in granite, half a league north-east of Banja; at Fered; and at Banja, six miles east of Vranja. I must add to these, the acidulous seltzer water of Jarmazow, near BosnaSerai; and those of Lepenitza, between Bosna-Serai and Zwornik. In Romelia, there are acidulous ferruginous springs at Berki, near Jeni Sagra; and at Hasskoe, east of Adrianople; but as the Turks do not sufficiently value this latter kind of springs, the traveller finds more difficulty in obtaining information about them than about the hot springs, which are always converted into bathing places by the Turks.
The temperature of the thermal springs is various. At Aidos it was 33° R.; at Banja, near the Rhodopus, 45° and 46°; at Sophia, 34° and 35°. However, notwithstanding this heat, the water near the Tondja contains Conferva. The chemical composition of these waters seems to be always nearly the same. In particular, they all contain sulphate of soda; and some, as those of Sophia, a little sulphate of magnesia. They all indicate the presence of more or less sulphuretted-hydrogen in a free state. Others contain a little muriate of magnesia or lime, as those of Banjo, Aidos, and Sophia. I was unable to detect the presence of carbonic acid or iron. Sometimes, but rarely, there are very minute traces of lime, as at Banja.
  Temperature of Cold Springs.—At Alexinitza, in the low hills of Southern Servia, a spring gave 13£° to 14° cent., the temperature of the air being 17°; at Jasen, in the lower part of the hills south-east of Leskovatz in Mcesia, a spring was at 12°, whilst the air was at 17° in the shade, and at 26° in the sun; a fountain on the plateau of the neighbouring hills, at an elevation of 900 feet, gave 16°, the air being at 19°; near Trn a spring was at 10°, and the air in the shade at 23°; at Bresnik one was at 10°, another at 11°, the air being at 28°, and a third at 15°, the air being at 18°; in the plain of Sophia a spring was at 13°, the air in the shade at 18°; at Sopot, near Lofdtscha in Bulgaria, at 12J°, and the air at 19°; at Csatak, in a valley of the Balkan, at 13A°, the air being at 23° in the shade, and 26° in the sun during the month of June; at Karasholi, near Osmanbazar, at 11°, the air being at 22° in the shade, and 31° in the sun; at Schumla at 12°, the air at 18° in the shade; at Rodosto (Tekirdagh), on the Sea of Marmora, at 18°, the air being at 26°; on the Tekirdagh plateau, south of Rodosto at an elevation of 700 feet, at 15£°, the air being at 18°; at Malgara, south of the Tekirdagh, at 13°, the air being at 21°; near Banja, at the base of the Rhodopus, at 13°, the air being at 21°; at six miles west of Prisrend, a spring in the limestone was at 12° or 13°, the air being at 28° in the month of August; at Scutari in Albania, the water of a deep well gave 12°, the air being at 29°; at Mokro, in the low hills, not far from BosnaSerai in Bosnia, and at an elevation of 2700 feet, a spring was at 12°, the air being at 8° during September.
These are the chief facts collected during my travels in 1837. Geographers may doubt some of my positions, and it is possible that I may have committed some errors; but I had this in my favour, that I was able to converse with the natives of each country in their own languages, and that, in addition to a strong desire for examining new countries, I always enjoyed good health during my travels. Travellers in Turkey are now secure and comfortable if they know and follow the customs of the country, and if they are accompanied by a Tartar. The Sultan has put an end to all highway robberies by means of the gibbet, his Nisam or European army, and the stations of gendarmes. Although some Haiduks still exist near the frontiers, they are only rebels, called highway robbers by the Turks; and, although the Turks dread them, the European traveller has nothing to fear from them, as they expect much from the interest which European Christians take in their situation. Indeed, people of all ranks are well inclined towards strangers. In Albania, the Christian, especially the Nemse, German or Austrian, finds security in places where the Turks are in danger; for the Myrdites are Catholics, and the Mahometan and Greek Albanians hate the Turks. In Bosnia strangers are well received, even during the petty wars which too often devastate that country.
  The only exceptions to this rule are some countries where only Asiatic Turks reside, and where there are Turks of the good olden time with their green turbans; as also a few Mahometan Albanian villages. Yet, even in these, the traveller is not exposed to any annoyance, but only experiences indifference and neglect. The former haughty Turkish appearance has now disappeared very much, although scarcely any of the Turks, except those employed in the civil and military departments, have thought it worth while all at once to change their handsome dress and turban for our European fashions. Besides, our dress requires household furniture, which does not exist in Turkey. No Turk seems as yet to have adopted our dresscoat. In places where Turks only reside, one still often finds that noble hospitality of the middle ages which our inns have banished from Europe. Turkey has undergone great reforms, but it must yet submit to many other changes. May a stable, just, and impartial government, soon procure for the inhabitants that security of person and property which travellers at present enjoy; and may the plague, and the injurious distinctions of Raja andGhiaours, soon disappear from Turkey. By results such as these, rather than by the creation of an European army, the Sultan's name would be rendered immortal.

