THE singular forms presented by the tuberous masses of flint found in the upper chalk have long induced naturalists and geologists to imagine that their forms were derived from Alcyonie or spongeous bodies, but I am not aware that this has hitherto been demonstrated to be the actual fact. Professor Ehrenberg’s observations on siliceous bodies first induced me, in common with many other persons, to cause thin slices of flints to be made, with the intention of procuring specimens of Xanthidia ; and in [the examination of these slices I was struck with the frequent occurrence of small patches of a brown reticulated tissue, which always presented nearly the same appearance. The occurrence of this tissue, combined with the circumstance of finding spicula exhibiting nearly the same form and size, and always occurring in about the same proportion, along with numerous foraminated shells and other extraneous bodies, strongly induced me to believe that the brown reticulated tissue was a portion of the remains of the organized body, the shape of which was represented by the flint nodules ; and the indications thus observed equally inclined me to believe, that if these flints were fossil organized bodies, they would almost inevitably prove to be sponges. With these views I commenced the investigation of the flints of the chalk, and as a preliminary measure I first examined, in a cursory manner, thin slices of flint nodules from various localities, especially of those from the neighbourhoods of Gravesend and Brighton, and from Hertfordshire, Norfolk, and Wiltshire ; and in all of them I found a perfect accordance in the structure and proportion of the reticulated tissue, and of the spicula before alluded to, and also in the occurrence of Xanthidia and ForammifercB. This similarity in the structure of the flints from all the above localities, renders it unnecessary to detail the results of each examination separately. I shall therefore confine myself to the description of what may be observed, by a careful investigation, in any chalk flint, without reference to the spot from which my specimens may have been procured.
   When thin polished slices of the common tuberous flint of the chalk are prepared by a lapidary, mounted upon slips of glass, and subjected to examination, as transparent objects, with a microscopic power of about 120 linear, it will be observed, that the appearance presented to the eye is similar to that of a thin stratum of a turbid solution of decomposed vegetable or animal matter, containing fragments of extraneous bodies, mixed with small foraminated shells, spicula of sponges, and minute animalcules ; especially of that highly interesting and beautiful genus, Xanthidium. Amid this heterogeneous mass there are frequently to be noticed fragments of the brown reticulated tissue, to which I have before alluded ; and occasionally, if the slice be from near the surface of the flint, these patches of brown spongeous substance are comparatively of considerable size, and are dense and opaque. In this state, and by this mode of examination, the reticulated form of the structure can only be perceived at the edges of the mass. When it occurs in this well-preserved form, which is indicated to the unassisted eye by the appearance of rusty brown coloured spots on the flints, it is best examined by placing a small round black patch, about two lines in diameter, behind the spot to be examined ; and then illuminated by a leiberkuhn ; and viewed with a power of 120 linear, it exhibits the characters represented in fig. 1, PI. XVIII. In that specimen, which is from a flint procured at Northfleet, near Gravesend, the structure is remarkably well preserved. The mass of the sponge appears to consist of numerous cylindrical contorted canals, which, from the uniformity of their size and the minuteness of their diameters, would appear to have been the in-current canals of the sponge. Occasionally orifices of a considerably larger diameter are dispersed in the mass, and have every indication of having been the large ex-current canals. The walls of these canals present the appearance of having been formed of a thin glairy network, bearing a strong resemblance to the reticular substance of the common freshwater sponge of the rivers of England. Amid the mass are found spicula, comparatively speaking, very sparingly dispersed; and minute foraminated shells of many species, imbedded in a precisely similar manner to what we observe on a larger scale in the recent Mediterranean sponge of commerce*. Very frequently, when but little of the reticulated substance of the sponge remains, its former presence is indicated by the siliceous matter exhibiting the aspect of a congeries of gelatinous globules, evidently arising from the silex having been moulded by the tissue amid which it was deposited; and the gelatinous molecules, when traced to the edges of small patches of the spongeous texture, are found to agree in size and form with the orifices of the supposed in-current canals. In other cases, no indication of the former presence of the organized structure of the sponge remains ; but its previous existence is proved by the mode in which the spicula, the foraminated shells and the other extraneous matters are found suspended, equally in all parts, and not precipitated to one particular portion of the flint, which would have been the case, had the space in which they were deposited been a mere hollow, arising from the imbedment and subsequent rapid decomposition of the body which has given rise to the peculiar form assumed by the mass; but, on the contrary, their continued suspension in their natural position indicates that the organized tissue in which they were entangled, retained its form and texture sufficiently long to allow of the infiltration and perfect fossilization of these interesting remains, in their original places. Had we no other evidence, the nature and position of these remains would have strongly indicated the former spongeous nature of the tuberous-shaped flints of the cretaceous beds. If the chalk be carefully washed from the exterior of a flint with a soft brush, and a portion of that surface be examined as an opaque object by direct light, with a microscopic power of about 50 linear, we shall observe it to present a peculiar saccharine appearance, with occasionally deep circular excavations ; and with small fragments of shells and other extraneous matters, partly imbedded in, or only slightly adhering to, its surface. If the surface of the flint be further cleansed from the chalk, by immersion in dilute muriatic acid, until effervescence ceases, the deep circular orifices will frequently be seen to have spicula projecting from their sides ; thus strongly pointing them out as having been, in all probability, the mouths of the larger ex-current canals. If small pieces, about a quarter of an inch in diameter, be now selected, presenting the roughest and most saccharine aspect, and these be illuminated by a leiberkuhn, and examined with a microscopic power of 120 linear, under favourable circumstances, it will be seen that the surface is formed by a complex mass of small contorted tubuli, the apices of many of them being furnished with a minute perforation, as represented in fig. 2, PI. XVIII. The tubuli on the surface of the flint stand boldly in relief from the more solid portion of the white crust, which surrounds the dense and semi-transparent mass. If we give but a slight consideration to the circumstances under which these bodies have been probably buried, we shall at once perceive that the characters exhibited by the surface of the flints, and the state of the tissues at this part, are exactly such as we should naturally expect to be the case ; for if a modern sponge of a close texture be immersed in water, in a tranquil situation, and a gradual deposit of calcareous silt, of small specific gravity, were to take place upon it, the deposited matter would penetrate the substance of the sponge to a very slight extent only, while the interior of the space would remain filled with pure or nearly pure water, and the portions of its structure thus embraced by the calcareous deposit would be protected to a great extent from the operation of other agents ; and we might reasonably expect that, although the minute hollow tubuli might be assailed from the interior of the mass by a second and more fluid matter, and thence become silicified, yet that the space between them would be occupied by the matrix in which they were imbedded : and this is exactly what appears to have taken place during the process of the fossili- zation of the sponge of the common flint. The structure, both internal and external, and the peculiarities thus described, are common to the great mass of the tuberous flint nodules of all the localities of the chalk formation of England from which I have been able to procure specimens, and under circumstances where we should have scarcely expected them to have been preserved.
   The structure and other characters of the layers of tabular flint are in perfect accordance with those of the nodular flints. Xanthidia, spicula, and foraminated shells are dispersed with equal abundance in its substance. The upper surface resembles in every respect that of the flint nodules, while the under one presents, even to the unassisted eye, a still more strongly marked spongeous aspect. Its general appearance is that of a sponge which has been built upon an irregular surface, and has followed the whole of the sinuosities. The great ex-current canals are larger and more numerous than usual; and the spicula are more abundant, frequently projecting from the surface, while the Foraminiferce are attached so abundantly to it, that upon a superficies of an inch and a half square, I have counted upwards of twenty specimens of various species, some of which were attached only by a minute portion to the mass, precisely in the manner in which small bodies are frequently attached to recent sponges. It would thus appear, that the only difference between the tabular and other forms of flint was, that at the period of the formation of the tabular flint the original sponge was built upon a firmer and less changeable surface than usual; and that under these circumstances it had obeyed its natural instinct, that of coating over any mass upon which its gemmule might have chanced to settle, in a manner precisely analogous to the habits of the freshwater sponge of our rivers, and to many other parasitical species -which are inhabitants of the sea at the present period. Wherever the sponge had settled upon a shell, or Echinus, this habit of coating the body it was based upon is strongly illustrated ; but as the substance thus built upon was probably to a small extent immersed in the silt or mud, we rarely find more than half or two-thirds of the surface enveloped, and from this circumstance it is, that we detect in chalk fossils so many which are more or less imbedded in flint; and among these, instances are found, varying from cases in which the sponge-gemmule had not long settled and commenced developing itself, to where it had grown to such an extent as to have exceeded many times the size of the base, upon which it most probably at first settled. The great mass of nodular chalk flints does not exhibit any indication of a base, except in those instances where extraneous substances appear upon the surface ; but this may be readily accounted for, when we consider, that probably, in the first instance, the gemmule was attached to some minute fragment of a shell or other substance, and that its further development took place while it was merely recumbent on the silt or mud; in the same manner as we occasionally find specimens of modern corals, etc., without any apparent base, the original attachment having been built over, after it had become separated or liberated. In one specimen of flint in my possession, the sponge appears to have been torn or injured, nearly at its middle, as a broad and distinct band or collar has been built round it, evidently with a view of repairing the injury and strengthening the substance at the weakened part.
   The perpendicular and oblique veins of flint, found in the chalk cliffs between Brighton and Rottingdean, and described by Dr. Manteli, present precisely the same internal characters as the tabular flint and the common tuberous nodules. The external characters are also similar to those of the tabular flint. If we observe these veins in situ, we shall frequently perceive, that the whole of their substance is not of uniform density, but that there are often, near the middle of the vein, parts where the two interior surfaces have not united, and that the spaces are generally filled with chalk. If this chalk be carefully removed or dissolved by diluted muriatic acid, the internal surfaces present the same appearances which have been described as characterizing the exterior of the ordinary flint nodule and the aspect of the whole is precisely such as we should expect to find, if the two sides of a fissure in a rock were covered by our common freshwater sponge, or one of similar habits ; and the two outer surfaces had been built towards each other and had joined in some parts, while in others they had approached, but had not united. The sides of these flint veins are not studded with numerous species of Foraminiferee, like the under surface of the tabular flint, but from the position in which the flint veins have been built, it is a natural consequence that this should not be the case.
   Having thus satisfied myself that the common tuberous flints, the horizontal tabular flints, and those forming perpendicular or oblique veins, were all produced by the same agency, and having observed the frequent occurrence of the partial imbedment of shells and other extraneous bodies, I was naturally led to infer, that in all probability the interior casts of Echinites and similar bodies, which are frequently found to be filled with flint, were also produced by the same agency; I therefore procured numerous specimens of silicified Echinodermata, and their examination strongly corroborated this supposition. Some of them were not entirely filled with flint; in one case a small portion only was siliceous, in others two- thirds or three-fourths of their interior were so occupied, while the remaining space was filled with chalk. Upon clearing away the chalk from this part of the specimen the flint never presented an even surface, such as would have been produced had a portion of fluid matter entered through the ambulacra and subsided, as water or any similar liquid would have done ; but, on the contrary, the surface was always undulated, and frequently projected considerably above the surrounding parts, more especially near the side of the shell, against which it was frequently built in semi-cones or columns, and in the space thus unoccupied by the flint there was always included one or both of the large orifices of the shell. The undulated surface of the flint thus concealed within the Echinite presents exactly the same organic characters which are observed on the flint nodules. Most frequently the Echinite is filled with the flint; and the animal having thus built its prison full, has usually perished from want of sustenance; at other times it has survived this incarceration, and has grown out of one or both of the great orifices of the shell, and has then, in some cases, increased to a very considerable extent. On the exposed surface of the whole of these, whether it be only to the extent of a slight convex projection from the orifice of the Echinite, or to a considerable mass, an accordance will be found with the organic characters before described.
   If some of the specimens of Galerites and Spatangus, which are filled with flint, be placed in diluted muriatic acid, and the whole of the shell be removed, the appearance presented by the siliceous casts will still further corroborate the opinion of their spongeous origin. Occasionally it will be found, that the ambulacral orifices of the shell have been filled with fine threads of silex, and that these are based upon the cast; but more frequently we shall find, that opposite to each of these numerous minute orifices, there is a small but deep depression, the interior of which presents the usual characteristic surface observed on all flints, and the minute tubuli will be seen as boldly projecting at the bottom and around these small excavations, as upon any of the exposed surfaces of the flint. In these cases the am- bulacral orifices of the shell have evidently been used by the sponge as so many inlets to admit the streams of water which were necessary to its existence ; and the depressions thus produced directly beneath them were clearly intended as a means of facilitating this operation. On the surface of the cast, in the immediate neighbourhood of the two large orifices of the shell, there is frequently a series of channels, which have evidently been left by the sponge for the same purpose as the depressions opposite the ambulacral pores, and the bottoms and sides of these channels exhibit the sponge tubuli in a like manner.
   It frequently occurs in the Echinites which are filled with flint, that portions of the shell have been replaced or infiltrated with silex. In all these cases that I have seen, the silex presents a stalactitical or chalcedonic form, and never exhibits the spongeous texture. Very frequently, however, thin laminae of spongeous texture are found to have been built between the plates of the Echinite, where they have happened not to have been quite in contact; and in these laminae the tubuli are as beautifully distinct as in the most favourable portions of the mass of the cast. If the surface of the cast be microscopically examined, we shall frequently observe that the flint has not been in such a state of contact with the shell as a cast from a fluid material would be supposed to present; for although the boundary of each plate is well marked, the areas of their impressions exhibit such a view of the tubuli of the sponge as we might naturally expect to find where numerous minute tubes have been built against a flat or slightly concave surface. Sometimes the sponge has grown round the interior of the shell, and has left a hollow near its centre ; and occasionally the sponge appears closely approximating, yet not quite adhering, to the inner surface of the Echinite. In these cases, a thin film of chalcedony is frequently spread over the organized surface of the sponge, which in a specimen in my possession is in several places to be seen through small breaks in the film.
   The results arising from the various forms of flint which have been described, induced me to believe that the flint cases enveloping the numerous and beautiful specimens of sponges and corals of the Wiltshire chalk would probably prove to have originated in a similar manner to the forms of flint before described. I therefore requested Mr. John Baker of Warminster, who collects large quantities of these beautiful fossils, to furnish me with some, the interior surfaces of which had not undergone the usual process of washing and brushing. Having cleaned these carefully, by pouring into them a small stream of water, I observed spicula projecting from all parts of the interior surface; and the same appearance was exhibited to a greater or less extent in more than twenty specimens which I examined, however different in character the sponge or coral enclosed within the flint might have been; the spicula appearing to have no reference whatever to the bodies thus enclosed, none of them being found upon the included body, but only upon the case. When microscopically examined, the interior surface of these flint-cases presented in every respect the same appearance as that exhibited by the under surface of the tabular flints ; and there are generally fragments of minute corals, small Terebratula and other shells attached to the inner surface ; and in the same case there are frequently two, and sometimes three, different species of coralline or spongeous bodies ; thus proving that these beautiful Wiltshire specimens are merely extraneous bodies which have been built over and enveloped by the common coating sponge of the chalk. Many of the contained bodies also present evidence of their having been exposed some time previous to being thus enveloped, as we frequently find upon their surfaces patches of Flustra, which are in the habit of seating themselves upon dead or inorganic matter. Thin sections of the cases of the Wiltshire fossils exhibit the characteristic Foraminiferce and spicula, as well as the common species of Xanthidia.
   It may be objected to this mode of accounting for the envelopment of sponges and corals by the common casing sponge of the chalk, that the enclosed bodies are usually almost in the centre of the flint, which would not be the case, if they had been dead specimens lying at the bottom of the ocean at the time they were built over; but in reply to this it must be remembered, that although dead specimens, they most probably retained the position in which they lived until the extraneous mass surrounding them might alter their centre of gravity, when they would fall on one side, and their bases would then, in all probability, be built over in the same manner as the remainder of the mass. In many of these bodies, also, there are portions of the enveloped sponge or coral which have never been invested, and in numerous instances there are orifices remaining in the flint-cases through which the roots of the enclosed body have passed out, and which were probably preserved from being built over, either by being buried in the soft mud, or by being attached at the bottom of the ocean.
   The tubuli of the flint-sponge are very minute : an average of the measurements of four well-defined tubes upon the surface of a common flint gave the y^-gth of an inch as the diameter; the smallest of these was the 5th, and the largest of an inch in diameter. The tubuli in this specimen were hollow; and one of them, which had been broken at a right angle to its axis, gave the following measurements : external diameter -gFoth, internal diameter TsV^nd of an inch; thickness of the substance of the tube 4x5-7 *h of an inch. In their size and proportion the tubes agree very nearly with those of the recent sponges. The average diameter of the fibre of the common sponge of commerce is about the TiVoth of an inch, and in the sponge from New South Wales the diameter varies from the of an inch to the 4x2nd. The spicula are large in proportion to the other parts of the tissue, very frequently exceeding the eighth or tenth of an inch in length. They are thinly scattered, and usually acicular in their form; but sometimes they are forked or branched, but this is comparatively a rare character. They do not occur in fasciculi, as in Halichondria, but are usually solitary, or a few are grouped together. They are mostly of an elongated, spindle-formed shape and somewhat curved, as represented in fig. 3, PI. XVIII., which exhibits them in their natural position, on the interior surface of a flint from Wiltshire ; or in fig. 4, PI. XVIII., which gives a series of the largest of them, separated from the white friable siliceous matter from the interior of one of the Wiltshire flints.
   The results arising from the examination of the flinty bodies of the chalk induced me to believe that the cherts of the greensand formations and of the oolites would probably prove to be of similar origin. I therefore examined thin slices of specimens of chert from the upper greensand pits of Fovant in Wiltshire, in the manner pursued in the investigation of the flints ; and I found, as I expected, the result to be of a similar description ; but in this substance the spongeous fibre is of a much coarser texture than in that of the chalk-flint, and the interstices of the network very much larger in proportion. The imbedded extraneous matters are also of a larger description, such as small fragments of apparently very fine branched vegetables, etc., in addition to Xanthidia and other small organic bodies. The form and mode of ramification of the tubular structure approaches nearer to those of the fibre of the common Mediterranean sponge than in the flint spongite. The tubes are seen dispersed in about an equal proportion through the whole mass of the chert. They are very pellucid, and would probably escape observation, if it were not that their surfaces are covered "with a short downy-looking structure, which gives them very much the appearance of minute portions of a very transparent Fucus, when viewed as a transparent object, with a microscopic power of fifty linear. Sometimes, but very rarely, portions of the tubes remain hollow, and they then display a very distinct and characteristic appearance, such as that exhibited by fig. 1, PI. XIX., which represents a portion of the tubes under these circumstances, as they appear when viewed as opaque objects, with the aid of a leiberkuhn. The average measurement of five of these tubes gave a diameter of 5th of an inch ; the largest being the ^f^th, and the smallest the th of an inch.
   The cherty nodules from the upper greensand of Shaftsbury presented appearances exceedingly similar to those observed in the specimens from Fovant. The black and semi-transparent mass of chert in the centre was surrounded by a coating nearly an inch in thickness, which had the appearance of agglutinated sand; and the outer surface of the coat assumed an eccentric tuberous form, very similar to that of the chalk flints.
   Upon microscopically examining the structure of this coat, as an opaque object, numerous contorted canals of various sizes were observed, and beautiful green spicula were visible imbedded in considerable numbers in the mass. It would therefore appear, that the same process went forward during the imbedment of this sponge, which we have supposed to have taken place during the envelopment of the sponge which originated the chalk flints; but the sponge, in this instance, being of a coarser and more open nature, it has been penetrated by the surrounding fine sandy matter to a greater proportionate depth than in the case of the chalk flints. Two casts of Spatangus in chert, from the upper greensand pits at Shaftsbury, presented results analogous to those obtained by the examination of the flint casts from the chalk ; the surfaces exhibiting numerous tubes and spicula, which corresponded in size and appearance with those shown in the thin sections represented by fig. 1, PI. XIX., so that little doubt can exist of the formation of these casts being similar to that of the chalk flints.
   Upon examining in the same manner a number of slices from a great variety of masses of chert belonging to the greensand of Lyme Regis, nearly the same appearances were presented as those afforded by the chert of the upper greensand of Fovant. A group of tubuli are represented at fig. 2, PI. XIX.: and their size, mode of disposition, as well as general character, so closely resemble those of the upper greensand, that there is strong reason to believe the sponge to have been of the same species, or very closely allied to it; and it was only when they were examined as transparent objects, with a power of 360 linear, that I could detect any evident difference. Under these circumstances the tubes of the former present the semblance of a mucous surface, with minute irregular particles of opaque matter adhering to them, while the tubes of the latter exhibit an appearance as if minute patches of a thin epidermal membrane had been partly detached from their surface ; but this trifling variation in the appearance of the organic structure may probably have been caused by a slight difference in the circumstances attending their fossilization. The tubuli vary in their size to about the same extent as those of the upper greensand spongite, but their average diameter is as nearly as possible the same.
   The dimensions and external form of the masses of chert in the greensand of Lyme are widely different from those of the upper greensand, and would seem to indicate a specific difference, but the resemblance of their internal structure evinces a very close alliance in every other respect. Two specimens of chert from the oolite, one being from the Tisbury limestone and the other from the Portland, afforded similar strongly-marked evidences of organized structure; but with this difference, that in these there appeared to be a greater quantity of the cellular structure of the sponge preserved than in any of the former instances ; and the appearances afforded by the structure, in both cases, were nearer to those of the freshwater sponge than any of the fossil sponges of the chalk or greensands, with the exception that there were fewer spicula than in the recent freshwater species. When small portions of dead and decomposing freshwater sponge were immersed in Canada balsam, and examined microscopically in the same manner as the siliceous slices, the appearance was so similar to that of the fossils, as to prove at once that the oolitic cherts derived their origin from decomposed spongeous masses.

  Dr. Grant, in his ‘ Outlines of Comparative Anatomy,’ in treating of the Poriphera, concludes his observations by saying. Iam strongly inclined to believe, that the siliceous spicula, in the cases under consideration, have not influenced the deposition of the flint in so great a degree as we may at the first view be inclined to believe, for there are circumstances attending this accumulation of the siliceous matter which are exceedingly curious in their nature. We find that the deposit of the silex is in no case limited or determined by the immediate presence of the spicula, nor do we observe, when thin sections of these bodies are viewed with the microscope, that the spicula have operated as nuclei from which the silex has radiated, in the form of needles or crystals driving the surrounding bodies before them, in the manner that we so frequently observe in silicified wood; while, on the contrary, we frequently notice in the chalk-flint spongites, that portions of the large ex-current canals are not filled with silex, and the spicula are seen projecting into them without even the slightest incrustation of siliceous matter upon their surface. On the contrary, the siliceous is in all these cases bounded by the extent of the animal matter of the sponge. Whenever a single tube, or a thin layer of tubes, has been projected from the mass, although it may have been imbedded in the chalk, there does the siliceous matter appear to follow, as if under the powerful influence of some species of elective attraction, with the laws of which we are at present unacquainted, but which I trust will hereafter become a subject of investigation to some of our able chemists; and this attraction of the silex to the animal remains is so complete, that the chalk adhering to the surface of the flint is as free from siliceous particles as that which is far removed from the mass ; and a hundred grains of chalk from the centre of a paramoudra, where we might with the greatest degree of reason expect to have found a more than ordinary quantity of silex intermixed, yielded but four per cent, of matter insoluble in muriatic acid, and of this probably one or more per cent, of the weight was owing to the impurity of the acid employed. If the immediate cause of the attraction of the silex had been due only to the presence of the spicula, it is probable that the animal matter would have undergone decomposition with a much greater degree of rapidity than appears to have been the case, and that the spicula would have been disengaged and precipitated to the bottom of the cavity caused by the imbedment of the sponge. But if we consider the attractive principle to have been the animal substances present, it will readily account for all the horny parts of the sponge, with the enclosed extraneous bodies, having retained the positions which they occupied during life; as the immediate and progressive deposition of the silex would probably afford a greater degree of strength and support to the tissues than that abstracted by their decomposition, and thus the whole would be sustained in its pristine form. The silicified shells of the greensand of Blackdown confirm this view of the cause of silicification, for in these testacea there are no siliceous spicula to serve as nuclei; the carbonate of lime having been completely dissolved and carried off by percolation, while the remaining animal matter, it would appear, has influenced the deposit of a solid and compact mass of pure siliceous material, unmixed with sand and unimpregnated by the silicate of iron immediately surrounding it; and the ligamentous hinge of the bivalves is frequently replaced in the same manner as the other parts of the shell.
   In the corals of the mountain-limestone, and in those of the Tisbury limestone also, the same attraction appears to have been exerted, as in both instances we find a considerable portion of the carbonate of lime has been removed and its place supplied by silex ; and in neither case can we suppose the previous existence of siliceous matter as an attractive agent.
   From the foregoing facts, therefore, it appears probable, that these abundant deposits of silex are in a great measure due to the presence of either animal or vegetable matter, and especially to the former.
   Similar phaenomena have taken place, but with a different material, in the London, Kimmeridge, and Oxford clays ; the fossilizing substance in such cases being sul- phuret of iron in the place of silex. In nearly all these animal and vegetable remains, the tissues are literally replaced by sulphuret of iron. In the numerous pyritical remains of stems of trees and of fruits in the London clay we find the cells and vessels often completely hollow; while the delicate tissues forming their walls have been replaced by bright, thin films of pyrites. In the animal remains in the same formation this attraction has been exerted in a very striking manner, the whole of the cartilaginous parts being frequently replaced by pyrites ; and in other cases, as the fossilized crabs, where the animal matter contained within the shell has exuded slowly from the body, we trace its influence upon the surrounding matrix which had been impregnated with it; for in all the masses of indurated clay containing such remains, the hardness increases in proportion as we approximate to the body of the animal. The same law is also very happily illustrated by the state in which we usually find the remains of Belemnites in the lias shale of the Yorkshire coast; the anterior portion of the Belemnite being generally free from pyritical remains, while the alveolus is enveloped by a mass of indurated clay, which is universally found to become harder and more pyritical as we cut down towards the body of the animal.
   Numerous other cases might be cited to illustrate the importance of the presence of the animal matter in the formation-of the fossil, and to prove that it is to this agent more than to the presence of the mineral substances in the original body, that we are indebted for the preservation of these interesting remains of the former inhabitants of the earth.


