(1.) THE Third Volume of the First Series of the Society’s Transactions, contains a Memoir by Dr. Berger on the Geological Features of the North-eastern Counties of Ireland. It is preceded by an Introduction from the pen of Mr. Conybeare, and is followed by a Supplement, the joint production of that gentleman and Dr. Buckland.
   The views of the structure of the country given by these authors are, generally speaking, correct; in many of the details, however, there are errors concerning those portions whose structure is anomalous or complex, and are such as strangers might be expected to fall into, who took a rapid survey of the district. Having had opportunities, from my local situation, of examining the North of Ireland leisurely and repeatedly, it was easy for me to become acquainted with the details of its structure ; I propose, therefore, to lay before the Society, in the following brief memoir, the result of my observations. As the remarks will be entirely supplementary, it is unnecessary to repeat anything contained in the memoirs referred to.
   My attention was first called to the peculiarities of this district by Dr. Mac Donnell of Belfast, to whom, previous writers on the North of Ireland, have been largely indebted, and to whom I am anxious to acknowledge my obligations.
   (2.) The district I propose to describe, is the north-east corner of Antrim, between Kenbane Head on the north-west, and Garron Point on the southeast ; being about eleven Irish miles long, with an average breadth of ten miles. It is traversed in a north-west direction by the Aura Mountains, a portion of the great chain which runs parallel to the sea-coast through the whole length of the county, and in this part of its course contains several mountains, varying from one thousand to nearly two thousand feet in height. The principal are, Trostan 1810, Sleiveanee 1782, Knocklayd 1685, Sleive an Orra 1676, and Ben-cruachan about 1500. From the main body of the chain project, in the southern part of the district, several long ridges, with flat, broad summits and precipitous sides. They reach almost to the sea-shore, and are separated by deep and narrow glens, which extend far into the interior; the principal being Glenariff, Glenaan, and Glendun. Through these glens flow rivers of the same name ; the waters of which are scanty in summer, but in winter are swelled by many tributaries, from the upland bogs ; and tumbling over the cliffs, excavate deep and wide channels, which present to the geologist perfect sections of the strata.
  In the northern part of the district, or that which has Glendun for its southern boundary, the surface of the country is occupied, at intervals, by considerable hills, which are detached from the main chain and from one another, but have a northerly direction, parallel to the principal chain. Those which deserve mention are Glenmackeeran, 1321 feet; Ballypatrick and Brishadhu, about 1100; and Carnanmore and Carnlea, 1250 each. They are of an elongated, narrow form, and in general slope gradually; but the eastern sides of those next the sea, shelve down to the shore in abrupt and ruq-o’ed terraces.
  The direction of these hills determines that of the valleys and river courses. The valleys have a north and south direction, and open into a principal one running east and west to the south of the elevated ridge which forms the coast from Fair Head to Ballycastle. The rivers flowing through these valleys turn westward, and pour their united waters into the sea at Ballycastle.
  On the western part of the district, the principal chain of mountain descends, in a succession of undulating hills, into the low country, which extends at their base from Corkev by Armoy to Ballycastle.
  (3.) The following are the principal formations which occur in the district: mica slate, old red sandstone, porphyry, carboniferous limestone, coal with its accompanying strata, new red sandstone and conglomerate, lias, mulatto, chalk, and trap. Granite, primitive limestone, and porphyry occur as subordinate rocks.
Mica Slate.
  (4.) This formation in the north-east of Antrim, does not vary from its ordinary character in the North of Ireland, as described by Dr. Berger. It occasionally passes into gneiss, and by the insulation of the crystals of felspar assumes a porphyritic aspect. It contains crystals of quartz and, rarely, of common schorl, also amorphous quartz, accompanied by chlorite.
   Mica slate occupies the greater part of the area under consideration. Its boundary in the southeastern part of the district is a line ranging, in an irregular north-east direction, from the eastern point of Teavemuile, a mountain forming the highest part of the ridge which bounds Ballyeemin Glen on the north, across the head of the glen in which Cushendall is situated; and along the northwest declivity of Cross-slieve, to the mouth of Glendun river1. From this point it occupies the coast as far as Murlogh Bay. From the base of Tibuliadh near Teavemuile it ranges north-west conforming in its direction to the eastern escarpments of the Aura Mountains, and constituting their inferior regions ; sweeping round the northern front of Bencruachan, which terminates the chain, it turns southwards and composes the lower part of all the mountains as far as Corkey, the whole of the low country which extends from Corkey by Loughguile and Armoy to Ballycastle, and the half of Knocklayd, in which it rises to the height of 800 feet. From Ballycastle its line of junction with the secondary strata trends eastward up the valley of the Carey, and with the stream of which its boundary nearly coincides, then turns northward until it finally dips under a narrow band of secondary rocks to the south-east of Fairhead, and is thus connected with its north-eastern termination in Murlogh Bay. Over all this area the general dip of the strata is south-east at a high angle; but there are frequent irregularities in the dip and inclination, and the strata are often much contorted.
   (5.) Other primary rocks occur abundantly, subordinate to the mica slate. Primary limestone is found at Torr Point, and on the declivities of Knocklayd, and in the townland of Ballynagard, near Ballycastle. Beds of felspar, porphyry, hornblende rock, and hornblende slate occur in several places. These have all been described by Dr. Berger. Granite is found near the village of Ardsillach on the road from Cushendun to Torr. It occurs in the face of a hill called Deaghan, which overhangs the road ; the bed is conformable to the mica slate; it is several yards wide, and is probably connected with a subjacent body of the same rock. It is composed of red felspar, which is the predominating ingredient, of minute portions of vitreous quartz, and of small crystals of brown mica.
Old Red Sandstone.
   This rock has little of the conglomerate structure ; being most commonly a coarse-grained whitish sandstone, with a little admixture of argillaceous and calcareous matter. It contains some fragments of other rocks, but in very small proportion to the mass.
   The fragments are water-worn masses of resinous quartz, varying in magnitude from the smallest particle to the size of a man’s head; also several varieties of porphyry, many of them the same as those of Kilnadore and the Knockans, afterwards to be described ; but many of them have no resemblance to those porphyries, subordinate to the mica slate, or to any other porphyry known by me in situ in the North of Ireland.
Some of the imbedded masses are the same as the base itself, showing either that parts of the rock have been derived from preexisting portions being worn down and afterwards recomposed; or that a preexisting rock of very similar structure has been entirely worn away in supplying materials for this great mechanical deposit. I have observed no pebbles of granite or mica slate. The largest of the fragments are identical with the base itself, while those of quartz are by far the most numerous. In most of the strata the fragments are few: they are rare in those adjoining the mica slate, while they occur in greater quantity and variety in those in contact with the newer conglomerate. Many of the strata, however, include no fragments, and in others they are collected into distinct groups in different parts of the same stratum, the remaining portion being quite free from them. The rock, moreover, often loses its coarsegrained gritty structure, and assumes a fine-grained sandy texture, like a grey freestone ; but by far the greater part possesses the appearance and structure formerly described. A sandstone occurs under low-water mark, in advance of the cliffs near the collieries at Bonnycastle. It is overlaid by the carboniferous limestone, and must therefore be the old red sandstone.
   (7.) This rock extends from Cushendun to the head of Ballyeemin glen, occupying the greater part of Cross-slieve, the upper portion of the glen in which Cushendall is situated, the lower part of the southern side and the greater portion of the bottom of Ballyeemin glen, also the whole southern declivity and half the table-land of the summit of the ridge which forms the northern side of that glen; the rest of the summit and the whole northern front being composed of mica slate, which seems to constitute the greater part of the ridge, as the covering of sandstone is very thin along the southern side. In the eastern face of this ridge, in the town-land of Tavnagharry, the mica slate protrudes from beneath the sandstone and occupies a small gulf-shaped area, surrounded by the sandstone on all sides except the north, where it is joined by a narrow neck, or isthmus, to the great body of the same rock. The Ballyeemin river crosses the southern part of this area; and the mica slate is seen in the bed of the river, overlaid, on the left bank, by the sandstone. In the bed and banks of the same river, near the head of the glen, two isolated patches of mica slate are met with, separated from one another by beds of sandstone of small extent, and are probably portions of the rock elevated above the general level, and from which the sandstone, having nearly thinned out in this part, has been worn away. The intervening beds of sandstone seem to occupy a trough or basin between these two projecting peaks or spires of mica slate. The newer conglomerate, which will be immediately described, and which here contains enormous masses of mica slate, reposes immediately on the mica slate forming the upper of these two isolated portions, the old red sandstone being most probably overlapped, or having thinned out.
  (8.) Over all the area occupied by the old red sandstone, the strata dip uniformly to the east. The angle of inclination, however, varies, being generally about 40°, and rarely less than 25°. Near the mica slate it is high and conformable to that rock, while at points remote from the schist it is less.
Porphyry.
  There are several varieties of this rock. The most common is a clay porphyryof red, grey, brown, reddish grey, and bluish red colours, irregularly intermixed in every possible manner. It contains crystals of glassy felspar, vitreous quartz, and calcareous spar, and small crystals of brown mica1. The crystals often disappear, and the rock passes into a claystone, or into an argillaceous sandstone, closely resembling the base of the finer varieties of the old red sandstone.
  Another variety is a clinkstone porphyry, of a bluish or greenish colour, which seems to pass, in some instances, into a close-grained greenstone.
   The area occupied by the porphyry is an irregular triangle, extending from Cushendall on the north to a little beyond the Knockans on the south-west: its eastern boundary being the sea between the mouths of the Cushendall and Balleask rivers. Within these limits the porphyry is continuous, and does not crop out in independent masses, as stated by Dr. Berger2.
  The strata of old red sandstone which are interposed on its western boundary between the mica slate and the porphyry, preserving their usually high inclination, dip uniformly eastwards, so as to pass under the porphyry. The summit of Court McMartin, a hill immediately adjoining Cushendall, is composed of porphyry, but the old red sandstone appears in its lower part. The isolated hill Teavaragh, behind Cushendall church, has also a base of old red sandstone. Strata of clinkstone porphyry crop out in its middle, while its summit is composed of a disintegrating green-stone. Further, the newer conglomerate on the shore covers the porphyry. It would appear from these facts, that the porphyry overlies the old red sandstone, through which it has been most probably erupted, and that it is covered by the new conglomerate.
  Few junctions being visible, there is little opportunity of observing alterations such as igneous rocks usually produce upon the sedimentary deposits; two instances, however, occur. At the mouth of the Cushendall river the strata of the newer conglomerate are tilted by the porphyry from their usually low inclination to a nearly vertical position ; but, as the contact of the two rocks is concealed, it cannot be determined whether any change of structure is induced upon the conglomerate. At the base of Teavaragh the old red sandstone is considerably indurated by the contact of the clinkstone porphyry which overlies it.
   
  (10.) Mr. Conybeare noticed abed of clay porphyry on the west side of Fairhead, under the level of the coal formation; it is probably contained in the old red sandstone mentioned as occurring there. If so, the analogy between its position and that of the Cushendall porphyry is striking and illustrative. The rock in both localities would thus be contained in the old red sandstone, and the new conglomerate which covers the porphyry at Cushendall overlies the coal formation in Murlogh Bay. (See after, art. 16.)
  Other points, near Cushendun, at which porphyry occurs, are noticed in the map.
Carboniferous Limestone.
  (11.) This rock is fully described by Dr. Berger. It appears on the shore near the Collieries, under the coal-field; but is of very small extent, and does not occur in any other part of the district.
Coal Formation.
  (12.) The coal measures exhibit the usual alternations of coal, sandstone, slate clay, and bituminous shale. To the accounts of it by various authors, I shall add only a few observations on its superficial extent.
  It has been stated, (p. 72) that the formation reposes at its northern extremity upon the carboniferous limestone, underlaid by old red sandstone; on its southern boundary it rests immediately on mica slate1.
   The sea is the northern boundary of the coal-field from Ballycastle on the west to the south-east corner of Murlogh Bay on the east; its southern boundary almost coincides with the Carey river from Ballycastle to the townland of Drumnakeel, where that river turns westward into the valley before mentioned. Here its boundary turns north-east and passing through Drumadoon, ranges by the trap of Fairhead ; and then extends eastward in a narrow zone between the trap and the mica slate, and, passing afterwards under the chalk, finally expands into a deposit of considerable importance in Murlogh Bay.
  The coal strata thus emerge on all sides from beneath the basaltic mass of Fair Head, which is by this means isolated. The usual alternations of sand-stone with slate clay and bituminous shale appear in many places; but are exhibited beautifully in a section on the banks of the Carey river.
  (13.) In Murlogh Bay the beds are precisely similar to those in other parts of the field. A sandstone cementing small quartz pebbles occupies the shore, and is well seen near the great dyke. Mr. Conybeare thinks it identical with the Cushendall conglomerate. It is undoubtedly much older,, as I shall presently show. The same rock, though less gritty in structure, extends to a considerable elevation in the bay, and alternates with beds of slate clay, and a dark blue, bituminous shale, as in the cliffs west of Fairhead. There also adits were made into the sandstone, and a considerable quantity of coal was obtained, but the workings are now abandoned.
  Fairhead reposes upon the coal formation. At the south-western termination of the area, near Maghera and Cairnlogher, in the county of Derry, a small coal formation occurs, resting upon carboniferous limestone and old red sandstone on the one side, and upon mica slate on the other, thus affording a complete analogy with the Ballycastle district.
New Red Sandstone and Conglomerate.
  (14.) The conglomerate of this formation has been fully described by Dr. Berger and Mr. Conybeare. In addition to the fragments observed by them, I noticed a few small round pieces of red granite, which would seem to have been derived from the beds of that rock, subordinate to the mica slate. This conglomerate passes (apparently) into old red sandstone on the one hand, and into red marl on the other. It lines the coast from Cushendun Bay to the commencement of the porphyry, at the mouth of Cushendall river, and extends a short distance from the shore into Cross-slieve.
  At Cushendall caves, the red sandstone alternates with the conglomerate ; but is so free from fragments, that it is quarried in considerable quantity and shipped for Belfast. The cement of the conglomerate also often passes from its ordinary coarse, reddish, and highly quartzose state into a finer and white sandstone, indicating a passage from the one rock into the other. Indeed so close is the connexion in mineral structure, that it seems almost impossible to draw a precise line between them.
  On the shore near Port Vinegar, the masses of porphyry imbedded in the conglomerate, are more numerous than at any other place, and are all identical with the adjoining rock; and as almost every variety is found in rolled and angular pieces, a great part of the conglomerate at this point, has been produced, apparently by the wearing down of the porphyry.
  At the southern termination of the porphyry the conglomerate is resumed, and extends to the mouth of Glenariff river. A change there takes place in the base of the conglomerate,—it first passes into a coarse red sand, containing the usual fragments; then into a fine stratified red sand, in which the fragments are loosely imbedded, adhering neither to the base nor to one another. These fragments gradually diminish in size and in quantity, until they ultimately disappear and the rock becomes a fine marl. Thus the conglomerate, with its enormous, imbedded masses, graduates so imperceptibly into a fine red sandstone, that it is altogether impossible to separate them in nature.
   The strata of the conglomerate on the shore, have an inclination conformable to the old red sandstone on which they repose; but near Red Bay castle, where the conglomerate graduates into red marl, its strata gradually pass from their usually inclined to a horizontal position, which the red marl afterwards preserves.
   The strata of the conglomerate are also horizontal along the front and north side of Lurgeidan mountain; and they are never found inclined in the interior.
   The conglomerate does not extend further south than the opening of Glen- ariff-glen. It rises to a considerable height on the eastern front of Lurgeidan Mountain, and stretches in a narrow zone around its northern base to the head of Ballyeemin-glen ; but the whole stratum soon after thins entirely out in the eastern face of Teavemuile, in the upper part of Corlane. Its prevailing character in the first part of its course is that of a siliceo-argillaceous base of a reddish grey colour, including numerous round and angular fragments of various sizes of quartz and mica slate, with smaller of red granite. Here also it rests in nearly horizontal strata upon the edges of the highly inclined beds of mica slate and old red sandstone, and when near the mica slate its base is often very micaceous.
   (15.) The red marl occupies the bottom and sides of Glenariff to a considerable height; and its uppermost strata, next the mulatto or green sand, are highly argillaceous, but never contain gypsum. That substance does not appear until after turning the point of Garron, where it is found in the argillaceous marl, subordinate to the sandstone. White and blue clay-galls also, are not unfrequent in the red sandstone of Glenariff. From Glenariff the red marl ranges round the front of Lurgeidan Mountain, overlying the conglomerate, but in a narrower zone, and turning westward along its northern side, runs out in the townland of Cuilags, a considerable distance east of the termination of the conglomerate. The same gradation between these two deposits, which I have described in Red Bay, is everywhere observable. In Mullach-fin-ooar, between Ardsillach and Torr, a patch of red conglomerate is interposed between the mica slate and the chalk; it includes loosely imbedded fragments of mica slate and quartz, and is very like the conglomerate of the caves in Red Bay. It extends along the south-east face of the hill fronting the sea.
   (16.) The red sandstone and its conglomerate are fully developed in Murlogh Bay, and present the same structure and the same gradations which have been already described (14, 15). The conglomerate covers the coal sandstone, and is identical with the less coarse varieties of the Cushendall conglomerate, particularly those of the cliffs in Red Bay, the fragments being as usual quartz and mica slate of various sizes, imbedded in a coarse sandstone of a reddish colour. Both the conglomerate and red sandstone terminate abruptly against the mica slate in the southern corner of the bay. On the northern side, the conglomerate extends under the greenstone of Fairhead, the red sand having previously thinned out. To what distance it ranges in this direction it is impossible to determine, the strata are so completely hidden by subsidences; but it is possible that it soon terminates, since it appears from sections exposed in other places, that the Fairhead greenstone reposes upon the coal sandstone itself.
  (17.) It has been thought that the trap and sandstone alternate here. I could detect no such alternation; and the mistake arose from “viewing the conglomerate in relation to some subsided masses of greenstone,” as has been well remarked by Mr. Conybeare.
  (18.) It may be questioned whether the rock which I have called new conglomerate, should be separated from the old red sandstone. The facts surely warrant such a separation ; and it may be well to recapitulate them. In our old red sandstone granite or mica slate pebbles never occur, while both are found, the latter most abundantly, in the conglomerate. The conglomerate covers the mica slate and old red sandstone unconformably. The porphyry overlies the old red sandstone, but is covered by the conglomerate: besides, in Red Bay and Murlogh Bay, there is a clear gradation from the conglomerate into the new red sandstone.
  (19.) This whole series of mechanical deposits with the intrusive rocks, is analogous, in many respects, to the conglomerate and accompanying rocks which occur in South Devon, the theory of whose origin is so well given by Mr. De la Beche in his Geological Manual (pp. 400, 405. 2nd edit.).
  (20.) Upon turning the Point of Garron and advancing towards the opening of Glenariff-glen, the lias which extends almost without interruption from Larne, again appears from beneath masses of fallen rocks, which strew the whole space between the shore and the cliffs : the only stratum visible is the slate clay; no limestone having been detected. The thickness of the deposit is here greater than on any other part of the coast, except at the little deer park of Glenarm ; but it cannot be accurately determined. The slate clay is well seen on the road-side, a little west of Cloch-a-stukan; and the soft substratum having given way, the road has sunk considerably. It terminates before entering Glenariff, the mulatto from this point resting on the sandstone, until near Ballintoy at the extreme north-western corner of the district, where the lias reappears.
Mulatto or Green Sand.
  (21.) Dr. Berger noticed, that the upper beds of this rock are of a homogeneous sandstone, while the lower frequently include quartz pebbles, and thus assume the conglomerate structure. These two varieties are constant in their character and relative position, from the Point of Garron to the eastern flank of Lurgeidan Mountain ; where the sandstone thins out, and the mulatto for the remainder of its range is a conglomerate. Under this form it continues its course between the chalk and the newer red conglomerate as far as the eastern part of Teabuliadh, where it ultimately disappears, extending some distance beyond the termination of the red conglomerate, and thus reposing on the mica slate. From the point where the mulatto sandstone ends, the mulatto conglomerate begins to contain fragments of mica slate in addition to the quartz pebbles, which alone had entered into its composition before; and they become much more numerous from the point w here it begins to repose upon the new red conglomerate. It never contains the red granite found in the conglomerate; but fragments of a white carbonate of lime, like an indurated chalk, are not unfrequent. It is difficult to say whence this limestone was derived.
  The existence of beds of mulatto near Armoy, on the western edge of the district, seems indicated by loose masses strewing the surface; but as no section is exposed, the mulatto, on this part of the map, is marked as doubtful.
   Where the stratum is fully developed, in the first part of its course, its thickness varies from six to ten feet, the conglomerate bed forming about one third of the whole. In the latter part of its range, where the brecciated bed alone occurs, the thickness varies from nine inches to three feet.

    In Farous-glen, on the south side of Glenariff, in the bed of a river which exposes a vertical section, the red sandstone is succeeded by a bed of blue argillaceous marl two or three feet thick, similar to that, which, in most places, forms the upper member of the sandstone series. On this marl the mulatto conglomerate rests, and is interstratified with a few thin seams of the argillaceous marl. That part of the marl which is interstratified with the mulatto, and the overlying portion to the thickness of six inches, contain very few pebbles; while the superior portion includes them in great numbers. In the north-east face of Lurgeidan Mountain, veins of mulatto, not exceeding- two inches in thickness, pass irregularly to the depth of from five to fourteen inches through the upper beds of the new red sandstone, which are here a fine red sand. The sandstone between the seams is charged with calcareous grains; and the regular stratum of mulatto conglomerate, which is here about one foot thick, is arenaceous in its lower part. This may be regarded as a rudimentary formation of the lower greensand, which attains a full development in other places, beyond the limits of our district. Both these instances of interstratification, are unexampled among the upper secondary deposits of the North of Ireland.
  A brecciated mulatto inclosing quartz pebbles only, and about three feet thick, underlies the chalk in Murlogh Bay, terminating against the mica slate in the south-western corner of the bay.
Chalk.
   (22.) The chalk having ranged round the sides and across the lands of all the glens from the Point of Garron to Teabuliadh, continues its course in a north-west direction, along the eastern declivity of the principal chain, then turning round the northern front of Bencruachan, takes a southerly direction along the western escarpment as far as Corkey. Here, after a short sweep to the west, it turns again northward, and continues in that direction by Ballyknock, Armoy, and Balleeny, to Ballycastle, where turning again westward, it forms the coast by Kenbane and Ballintoy towards the Causeway. In the interior of the country, the chalk constitutes part of the four isolated hills, Knocklayd, Ballypatrick, Carnanmore, and Mullach-fin-ooar, all ranging in a north and south direction, and lying in the same parallel of latitude. In the three former it is covered by a thick cap of trap ; but in the latter it is uncovered.
   It is also uncovered by trap in the northern part of Carnanmore, and extends thence in a zone of considerable breadth through Coolnagoppoge and Ballynean, to the cliffs above Murlogh, where it abuts abruptly against the greenstone of the Pairhead.
   This zone presents the greatest surface of chalk uncovered by trap in the North of Ireland; and it is here only that the peculiar vegetation of the chalk is exhibited. The soil is a light dry mould, covered by an intensely green turf, which is bespangled with myriads of daisies.

