  My DEAR SIR, THE subject of my present letter may perhaps be interesting to the Geological Society, and if you think so, I shall be obliged to you to communicate it to them; it will at least show, that though at a distance, they have not passed from my memory.—I have been employed for the last month in an excavation at Tivoli, in a spot where the villa of Manlius Vopiscus, described by the poet Statius, is supposed to have stood. This point is, however, disputed; and I cannot say that my excavation has produced any decisive evidence to prove its truth, though there appears to me to be increased reason to believe it. I will not however say any thing more upon that head, as I hope next spring to renew my research; but I will hasten at once to the principal object of this communication.—In the course of our excavating, we found a considerable number of fragments of a rock, which is, as far as I can learn, entirely new, among those employed by the ancients. I have inquired of several of the principal lapidaries of Rome, and they all say that they never saw or heard of it before, as found among ancient ruins. This rock is green granite; that is to say, granite, the felspar of which is of a green colour, and exactly resembling that which is commonly called Amazonian stone. The fragments which I have found have been generally small, and some very small; the largest is about the size of a small melon. I have consulted the only two mineralogical works which I have with me, "Allan's Synonymes," and "Jameson's System of Mineralogy." In the former, Siberia is the only locality mentioned for green felspar. Jameson (2nd edition, vol. i. pages 375, 376.) states that it is found in a vein in granite, in the government of Ubinsky, in the Uralian mountains; also in contemporaneous masses in the granite of Onega; and further, that it is found in small rolled pieces on the banks of the river of Amazons. It would be interesting to know from whence the ancients derived it; as its two Siberian localities must have been little more accessible than that in the undiscovered continent of America. In endeavouring to ascertain this point, we are not entirely without a glimmering of light, as on some of these fragments, which show their original surface, there are Egyptian hieroglyphics. This circumstance induces me to suppose that green granite must have been found, though as a very rare substance, in Egypt. What these masses were, when the villa of Vopiscus was standing, it is useless to inquire; and perhaps future excavations may settle that point. By the largest mass which I had the good fortune to find, it appears that quartz was the principal constituent of the green granite; the felspar was however pretty abundant, and the mica disseminated in very small proportions, and of a black colour. In one fragment are some appearances of black acicular crystals in the quartz, probably either hornblende, or tourmaline.
Accompanying this letter, I send five specimens;—one, of which I have had a surface polished, will you be so kind as to give in my name to the Geological Society? I also send for the Geological Society a small specimen of a decomposing red slaty mineral, which I found in my excavation, and with which I am unacquainted. It appears to have formed part of a cornice.


