
IT is not I believe generally known to English geologists, that we have now within the limits of the British dominions perhaps the finest example in the world of extinct volcanic action—I allude to Aden, our new settlement on the coast of Arabia, where I had an opportunity of spending a short time in the early part of the present year. Imperfect as the following description, the result of hasty examination, may be, it will still embrace a few principal facts respecting this interesting locality, and serve at the same time to direct towards it the attention it so well deserves.
  The promontory of Aden is situated about eighty miles eastward of the Straits of Bab-el-Mandel, in latitude 13° north ; and it consists of a bold cluster of volcanic rocks rising into lofty and jagged peaks, which are connected with the main land of Arabia by a low sandy isthmus. The extreme length of the promontory may be about six miles, the breadth half as much. The loftiest and most prominent portions of the whole mass are volcanic, and the lower portions are partly volcanic also, but exhibit many beds of consolidated sea-sand, which have been more or less elevated above the general level of the ocean. The most interesting portion of the promontory is however an immense volcanic crater, which is situated at the extremity next the main land, and in the very centre of which the town of Aden with the British cantonment stands. This magnificent crater is nearly circular in form ; its diameter is probably about a mile and a half, and it is surrounded on the northern, western, and southern sides with precipices chiefly composed of lava, and rising from 1000 to 1776 feet in height, the latter elevation being that of the “ Gebel Shunsam,” a lofty range of volcanic peaks, which form the crater’s western side. On the eastern side the wall of the crater has subsided or been broken down for about half a mile, thus allowing the sea to come almost close to the town, and forming a small bay, generally occupied by native Arab vessels. Still however the lofty and abrupt island of “ Seerah,” about the middle of the gap, serves as it were to connect the broken portions, and almost to complete the original circle of the crater. Northward of this great focus of eruption, and ranging to the extremity of the promontory, is an immense mass of lofty and jagged rocks, all composed of lava. They have indeed much the appearance of a cluster of smaller volcanic craters, the sides of which have been washed away to the eastward by the action of the sea; but on this portion of the promontory, I was able to bestow but a slight and hurried examination.
  The interior of the great crater in which the town of Aden stands, presents almost a flat surface, and is not elevated very much above the sea-level, the volcanic orifice appearing to have been filled up so far, partly by the crumbling in of the sides, and partly by the matter which may have washed in from the sea. The crater itself, though at first sight almost perfect, has manifestly undergone some rude shocks, the effects of which are very apparent on examination. It has in fact been cleft entirely through in one direction and partially so in another; a great fissure ranges across it from north to south, and the two rents formed by it in the walls are called the “ northern” and “ southern passes,” the former of which being very important in a military point of view, as it affords the principal ingress, is strongly fortified. The western half of the crater stands entire, forming the “ Gebel Shunsam,” which, as already noticed, is 1780 feet in height, and has within it a curious ledge of rocks about half its own elevation, which I had not time to examine. The eastern half of the crater has evidently undergone a partial subsidence ; as it does not rise to more than half the height of the western side, and it appears to have separated in two parallel lines at right angles to the great north and south fissure. It is on the line of these subordinate fissures, that the sea, as before noticed, has broken in, and between them stands the island of “ Seerah,” which, although left as it were without support on both sides, has itself very slightly subsided.
  While viewing the grand disruptions of this great volcanic mass, which although of commanding altitude and several miles in circumference, has evidently subsided, like a cottage undermined by a neighbouring stream or river, I naturally looked back to the great catastrophes which had happened on the spot, and endeavoured to determine their nature. The volcano itself may probably have been submarine in the first place, and successive eruptions may have gradually elevated it above the level of the sea. After this its paroxysms appear to have become less violent, as otherwise the sides of so vast an orifice might have attained a much greater elevation than 1700 or 1800 feet. From the great subsequent subsidence on the eastern side, it would appear that in that direction the volcano had been gradually undermined, till at length it cracked from north to south, and the subsidence of the eastern half took place. This enormous mass, however, in subsiding seems to have cracked again into three portions by fissures at right angles to the direction of the principal movement. The subjoined woodcut will render this explanation more clear, and make it better understood.
  Such appearing to be a brief outline of the physical history of this volcano, the eruptions of which were probably accompanied by the throwing up of smaller cones to the northward, I shall now briefly advert to the various rocks which compose the promontory of Aden, and the phaenomena they present. The rocks which I observed were the following :—A dark brown or chocolate-coloured lava, generally of a very cellular texture, which is by far the most abundant rock. It forms all the high peaks of the promontory, as the “ Gebel Shunsam,” the upper part of “ Seerah” Island, and the bold cluster of rocks at the northern extremity, called the “ Ras Marbel,” and it in many places constitutes the whole mass down to the sea level. This enormous accumulation of lava is sometimes, especially on the east side of the great crater of Aden, separated in the middle by a very thick bed of greenish porphyry, having generally a slightly lamellar structure. This porphyry is itself interstratified with red ochreous beds, which occur also between it and the lava, and appear to be derived from either decomposed lava, or from showers of volcanic matter, afterwards converted into an ochreous clay. Near the “ northern pass ” I observed a curious granular rock, probably a volcanic breccia; but having lost the specimens I collected, I am unable to describe it with any precision. Apparently at the base of all the above rocks, there are in places, especially near the “ northern pass,” thick beds of slightly consolidated sea-sand, which seem by their diagonal stratification to have been drifted by opposing currents, and may probably have formed the bed of the sea, when this great submarine volcano first broke forth. In the northern part of the promontory, the flat line of coast, between the volcanic peaks on the one side and the sea on the other, is evidently merely a raised beach, where the loose sea-sand is consolidating into a tolerably compact sandstone, owing to the action of a tropical sun upon the calcareous matter of the sand. This formation of recent sandstone is further interesting from its inclosing numerous existing shells and corals of the adjoining Arabian sea. As regards the stratification of the rocks here described, the porphyries and volcanic products have generally an inclination of about 15° from the crater, but in some places their position is irregular and contorted.
  Independently of the great fissures and lines of subsidence before noticed, the volcanic rocks of Aden present numerous and striking examples of dykes raking through them like walls, and generally almost perpendicular. These dykes appeared to me to be chiefly filled with siliceous matter, and to be both harder and more compact than the adjoining volcanic rocks. The most prominent and remarkable of them is one near the “ main ” or “ northern pass it is several feet wide, and has almost the appearance of a vast wall crossing the mountain. Other conspicuous dykes are seen in “ Seerah ” Island, cutting through both the beds of porphyry and lava. I observed in many places small veins of chalcedony intersecting the lava.
  Some pieces of black and green obsidian from the volcanic rocks of this promontory were kindly given to me by Dr. Malcolmson; but I did not see the places where they were collected, nor learn the circumstances under which they were found. The green obsidian is quite glassy in its texture, and in some of the specimens the colour is very pale. One piece is very interesting, the obsidian itself running in small veins to a coarse cellular trachytic rock, and suggesting the idea of materials of very unequal fusibility, having been exposed together to the intense heat of the volcano, the result being a segregation of the most fusible portions, and the melting of them into obsidian, while the adjacent refractory matter has undergone but little change.
  The above hasty sketch of this interesting tract is given as an imperfect outline only; but should this port be abandoned, even these rough notes may become valuable, as no European could then visit this spot. Should, on the other hand, the settlement be retained, the present notice may attract the attention of future travellers who may have more leisure to examine the promontory of Aden. I would remark, in conclusion, that few contributions to geology would be more valuable than an examination not only of Aden but of the other volcanic groups, some of them as yet hardly extinct, which extend north-westward from that promontory through at least the southern portion of the Red Sea.

