

ON tracing that chain of connection which, amidst an almost endless variety, binds the different parts of creation together, we can perceive, in the material world, the progressive links, from inert matter, to the living principle superinduced on the most delicate organization; and in the intellectual world also, from instinct, ascending through those faculties which are exhibited, by animals, to the rational responsible soul, which, with or without the human body, identifies Man. We shall limit this Abstract to what relates to the material division of the Scale, and, noticing very briefly the three lower points in the gradation, enter more at large into the characters which distinguish the Living Principle from Organization and Instinct, which have been generally blended together in one common confusion. The main object of this paper, indeed, is the extrication of these from their entanglement, and the fixing them respectivelyin their proper places in the Scale of Being.
Immediately connected with the individual particles of matter which lie at the bottom of the scale, stands the principle of aggregation;—a principle altogether dependent on gravity. Its operation is not without a tendency to determinate form; but as that tendency is not sufficiently strong to resist the surrounding counteracting attractions, the merely aggregated masses are amorphous.
  Stratification succeeds. All stratified rocks are more or less crystallized; but the regularity with which, amidst all their anomalies, and occasional insubordination, these great masses are deposited, and the mighty preparation required for dissolving and re-forming the whole exterior of the globe, and that without destroying the homogeneity of the strata, lead us to a higher agency than mere gravity and affinity -, and while we admit the operation of these principles, and the efficacy of that operation, in circumstances adapted to the attainment of the end, we can only, in the spirit of sound philosophy, refer the full accomplishment of the work to their agency under the direct and controlling influence of that Almighty Word which commanded matter itself into existence.
  Crystallization, the next point in the Scale, is a principle more precise in its operation, depending chiefly on chemical affinity. Under its influence, matter always assumes determinate forms. Its adherence to this law, indeed, is so unbending, that the ingenuity of man has not yet been able, by any intermixture or management, to produce the slightest change on the angle appropriate to any one crystal. There is an analogy between the peculiar angles of crystals, and the peculiar angles at which the buds and branches of plants are protruded; but in plants, the law is modified by a number of circumstances.
We now arrive on debatable ground; for, on ascending the step to Organization, we come into collision with the opinions o f my distinguished friends Dr Barclay and Dr Thomson; and it is with no small degree of diffidence that I venture to oppugn their philosophy. Referring to Dr Barclay's paper on Organization, the opinions expressed by that learned gentleman may be stated to be, That the principle of organization is a Being which discriminates, which forms the organs, keeps them in repair, and of design deserts them altogether, when they become irreparable. And nearly to the same effect with regard to the discriminating faculty of the agent, Dr Thomson appears to have expressed his opinion as to the principle which assimilates the food, and repairs the waste in the animal frame. That the phenomena of digestion and assimilation are wonderful; that they exhibit evidence of the operation of mind possessing infinite power, can scarcely escape the perception of the most stupid insensibility; though the reason why they are so arranged, and not otherwise, must be referred to the pleasure of Him who made them so. It must also be at once conceded, that the changes which take place in the living body, require, in order to account for them, something more than the mere existence of chemical affinities. But it is another, and a very different question, Whether that Being who has confessedly formed matter, has introduced a thinking principle into the animal frame, with the charge of superintending the chemical changes to which its different parts are continually subjected? That the living principle is not the soul, seems decisively proved by the fact, that vegetables, which (except with poets) have no souls, have unquestionably the living principle; the process of digestion going on in the laboratories of the leaves. The whole difficulty seems to arise from the ascription of a discriminating power to that arrangement by which the food is assimilated, and the breaches and injuries of the frame counteracted and repaired. But there seems to be no necessity for the introduction of any such power. It is admitted, that all the changes produced, are chemical changes, and that they are proximately produced by chemical affinities: but it is asked, in the tone of a negative assertion, How do the digestive powers adapt themselves to varied circumstances? How are the elements of the different substances forwarded through their successive stages, and preserved, unaltered, through all the windings of their devious course, till brought within the sphere of chemical action, exactly at the places where their decomposition and new combinations are useful? Yet why should we hesitate about these things? They are not more inexplicable than many other phenomena, which, though calculated to excite the admiration of every intelligent observer, do not suggest to him the necessity of introducing the faculties of mind to account for their appearance. The naturalization of exotic plants is quite analogous to that alteration in the digestive process, produced by a change of food on carnivorous or granivorous animals, and which appears to Dr Thomson to be so inconsistent with material functions. But it is only necessary for us to recollect, that the difference between different kinds of food, arises more from the difference in the proportions of the ingredients, than of the ingredients themselves. It is true, that animal food contains azote, which is not a constituent of the vegetable. But azote is not poisonous ; and, to the granivorous tribe, will be merely superfluous, like iron, sulphur, and other extraneous substances in plants; whilst the want of this ingredient in vegetables, will be made up by a supply from the atmosphere, and other sources, to such carnivorous animals as require it. It agrees with all the analogy of Nature, however, that it should require frequentrepetition to effectuate this change. And a satisfactory reason why it should do so, is suggested by the very nature of the thing. All the organs and secretions by which the food is digested, are compounded of materials proportioned to the nature of the accustomed food. A change in the proportions of the food, must, therefore, gradually change the proportions of the organs and juices. There can be no doubt but it does so. By the selection of the food, the grazier can, to a very considerable degree, lay on fat or flesh on his stock as he pleases. Now, the food he gives them, differs only in the proportions of the ingredients; but these differences are sufficiently influential to determine the particular substance which is to be formed. It is to be remembered, that it is the feeder of the cattle who makes the choice; and therefore we must conclude, that the digestive operation is a necessary one, like mechanical attraction, or chemical affinity; and that, though it may be produced by neither of these, there is no occasion to look for its immediate cause beyond the agency of a law of matter.
Neither is it more unaccountable, that the bile should mix only with one part of the food which leaves the stomach; and that, when mixed with bile, that particular portion should not combine with chyle, though in mechanical connection with it. It is only necessary to suppose, what is not only possible, but very probable, that at whatever point in its progress, a change takes place in the food, there is placed at that spot, by the original constitution of the frame, some new chemical agent, by whose peculiar affinity with the chyle, the new combination is formed. But this agent has no power of direction. It is a mere principle, like all the organs and principles of the material world, accomplishing the determinate object for which it is constructed or impressed.
The reasoning applicable to the phenomena of assimilation, goes far to explain the manner in which the waste of the body may be supplied; the fractures repaired; and, in some instances, its disorganization counteracted or corrected. When the vessels are emptied by the daily waste, it is apparent, that they will be fitted to take up more of those particles with which the juices lodged in them have a tendency to combine, than when these juices are already saturated, and the vessels full; hence, a constant supply will be secured, as long as food is presented, and the vessels are in condition to secrete the juices, and perform their functions for disposing of the supply. The very same explanation may suffice, for the cure of wounds and fractures, where an extra stimulus may be supposed to augment the secretions, and, consequently, the depositations.
These are simple views, and draw but little on the imagination for their support. There is, however, a greater difficulty remaining; not as to the existence of a thinking or discriminating power, but as to a living principle, distinct from sentient existence, and from mere mechanical and chemical agency. We can comprehend how the chyle and the blood may, in their progress from stage to stage, supply all the varied demand of membrane, muscle and bone; but it remains unexplained, by any of the principles with which we are familiar, in what way are generated or continued, those motions which carry the nourishment to these different stages, and expel what is either superfluous or unfit for use. The peristaltic motion, the pulsation of the heart, and the involuntary movements of the muscles, exhibit phenomena inconsistent with the idea of inert matter, and equally distant from the effects of attraction or repulsion. These motions may all, indeed, be referred to muscular motion; and it seems also to be true, that all muscular motion depends on nervous energy or irritability; but this only leads us to a more wonderful contemplation. The whole animal frame is ramified with nerves; and their universal efficiency is proved, by the immediate destruction of those parts, the nervous fabric of which is destroyed. How the nerves communicate information we do not know; but in whatever way effected, the change of state of the smallest nerve being communicated at that point, from whence all the nerves originate, and where they are all concentrated and united, an action may naturally, and must be produced on the whole system, corresponding to each peculiar excitement. That this is the very mode in which the animal machinery works, we by no means assert. While the operations are in progress, they are beyond our observation; and whilst we are in doubt, whether the nerves contract or vibrate, or contain a fluid, or are altogether solid, it is not to be expected, that we can offer proof of the manner in which their active agency is exerted. Yet we may hazard an opinion, that whatever be their peculiar composition, or their means of communicating over the whole, an impulse applied to one particular point, it must be by some such connection as we have attempted to describe, that the principle does operate; and that, though a law or principle sui generis, it is still only a law or quality impressed on matter. In pursuing this investigation, one can scarcely avoid perceiving the distinctive characters, which prove that there is a structure peculiar to the organs; and that it is inaccurate to say, that it is the living principle which determines that structure. What we have contemplated is the fact, that by the structure of these organs, actuated by a living principle, certain functions are performed, which, without such structure, or such living energy, neither the one nor the other alone, could have accomplished. The structure is the organization; the living principle is something else. They are intimately connected together, no doubt; but so is the mind with the body. The one is the substance moved; the other the moving power. Holding, then, organization to refer to the structure of the organs, we may perceive, that, though more complex and delicate in its arrangements than crystallization, it maybe equally resolved into a principle or law, impressed on matter, for the application of mechanical power, and the evolution of chemical affinities.
There is one point of view, however, in which crystals and organized bodies materially differ. The original specific character of each animal and vegetable, in the thousand and ten thousand varieties that overspread the earth, is no effect of chemical affinity. The peculiar character of each of these, could only be impressed by that Great Being, who, when he commanded the world into existence, willed, that the tribes of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, should each be brought forth after their kind. The parent, therefore, in each of these, in reproducing the species, has not to create, but to continue the specific character already created; and as that specific character can alone depend on the difference in combination, in proportion, in quantity, and in position of the few ingredients of which all are composed, there can be no difficulty, we apprehend, in forming an idea of such t structure of the organs, as may fit them for being mechanically and chemically employed in the assimilation and deposition of food, for the continuance of life, and reproduction of the species.
  Dr Barclay does not seem to me to have sufficiently attended to this important circumstance. He appears to hold the opinion, that the origin of the animal foetus, is an unorganized fluid, with a little active being inclosed in it, which forms the organs. But that the animal rudiment is a fluid, is by no means clear; the presumptions, to my mind, lie quite the other way. The thing itself, of which this is the origin, is not fluid, but solid; and all our ideas connected with its nature, relate to solid body. That it is immersed in fluid, is true; this is a wise provision for preserving it in safety. In plants, where in many cases it must be scattered by the winds to become productive, the pollen is a dry solid body, which flies like dust; but in that case, nature has provided a fluid in the pistil, to facilitate its passage into the interior of the seed-vessel. If any thing on this subject admits of being concluded upon as certain. it seems to me to be the proposition, that in the animal, as well as in the vegetable tribes, the parent produces the organized foetus or seed. It may be, that some of the organs are perceptibly developed sooner than others. It is natural to suppose, that those immediately employed in secreting the nourishment, should be first displayed, especially in those animals which are hatched without deriving subsistence from the mother. But in all cases, the direct conclusion from analogy is, that the parent prepares the organized rudiment of its offspring, which requires only the common operation of its organs to complete the animal.
From organization, then, which is a lower point in the scale, we ascend to the Living Principle or vis vita;;—terms which may be safely adopted, provided we keep in view, that it is not by this principle the soul lives; and that when our bodies shall be mouldering in the dust, and our souls existing in a disembodied state, this living principle shall have ceased to live. A concomitant only on animal and vegetable life, it must vanish with it, like the corresponding portion of gravity, which would cease to exist on the annihilation of the particles of matter on which it was impressed.

