THE mountains, a part of which I am about to describe, range (with the exception of the debouchures of rivers) almost uninterruptedly from the Sutluj, which separates the territory of the British Government from that of the Sikh chieftain, Runjeet Sing, to the Burhampootur river, and the district of Cooch Behar. Their general bearing, in the portion near the Sutluj*, is N.W. and S.E.; but in that approaching the Burhampootur, it is many points nearer direct east and west. They lie at the foot of the great Himalayan chain, with which they are in some parts connected by a succession of low mountains; but in others, as in the districts under review, they are separated by valleys from three to ten miles in width, and called by the natives Deyra Dhoon, Kearda Dhoon, &c., or the Valley of Deyra, the Valley of Kearda, &c. The highest peaks do not far exceed 3000 feet, and the generality of the summits vary from 2000 to 2500 above the level of the sea. It is necessary, however, to premise, that my observations have not extended further eastward than the Ganges; and that whatever I may record, in this paper, beyond that river, is given on the authority of others.
  Between the Ganges and Jumna rivers, this line of mountains is separated from the great chain of the Himalayas by the Dhoon, or valley of Deyra, the average width of which may be under ten miles. At the Ganges, or southeastern extremity, a road passes between the chain and the river; and no difficulty whatever is offered to the approach to the valley. At the opposite or Jumna extremity, on the contrary, the mountains are in many places scarped into the river; and the footpath used by the boat and raft people, is an irregular track, over ridge and through hollow, and impinges upon the river at those points only where the stream, in its meandering course, strikes the opposite side of the channel. The intermediate roads, or ghats, follow the rivers or hill-streams; for in such an utter confusion of mountains, any other passage is impossible. A few of these roads are passable for wheeled carriages, but the generality are bad footpaths. Between the Jumna and the Sutluj are two other valleys, the Kearda and the Pinjore, separated from each other by one of those complex masses of mountains which connect the lower with the upper Himalaya range. The hills are generally less precipitous in this neighbourhood ; and the higher points and ridges are separated by valleys, affording a drainage to the country, and displaying on each side high and beautiful sections of the stratification. These valleys, or plateaux—for, with reference to the rivers running below them, they may be considered as such— vary in width, but extend along the whole course of the mountain-streams.
  As much confusion may be avoided, in the absence of a native name for the whole range of these mountains between the Sutluj and the Burhampootur, by establishing one, which may be considered legitimate, I wish to propose that of Sevalik*, formerly applied to the portion between the Ganges and the Jumna; a name which appears to me better than that of the " Lower Hills" or the " Sub-Himalayan," terms, equally applicable to the subordinate ranges northwards of the Himalayas.
  These preliminary observations, with the appended sketch of the countryf, will make the reader acquainted with the field of our fossil discoveries; and I proceed to the description of the geological features of the tract. The formations composing the hills, consist of beds of boulders or shingle, either loosely mixed or agglutinated by clay and carbonate of lime; of sands of various degrees of consistency; of marl or clay conglomerate; and of an infinite variety of clays; the two latter being most extensively developed to the westward of the Jumna. The strata dip from 15 to 35 degrees, generally towards the north; and the breadth of the inclined beds is from six to eight miles.
   The succession of the strata is irregular, with the exception of the shingle in the more northern tracts, where it appears to overlay as well as to alternate with the sandstones; whereas, although the debris is in considerable abundance in the water-courses, and on the flanks of the hills, I have never met with these shingle-beds south of the most northern half of the hills. A similar remark applies to the marl, but in a contrary direction, as it occurs only to the south. The want of the marl in the northern sections may be accounted for, by supposing it to have been either a local deposition or a general one, which is not exposed throughout its entire range.
   Although I consider the whole of this tract of mountain as composed of one formation, it may be of use to divide the portion between the Jumna and Ganges, from that westward of the former river, as it appears to me, that there is a marked difference (as before stated) in the shingle strata, as well as in the position and number of the clay beds; although perhaps nothing further than would be exhibited on any extended line of country, formed of debris from different tracts of mountains. The causes which upheaved this district, apparently acted more energetically in the contracted surface eastward of the Jumna, than in that to the westward; though, in the latter, the surface up- heaved is much more extended. I shall therefore divide these notes into two sections; the first consisting of the tract between the Jumna and Ganges; the second, that westward of the Jumna. To commence, therefore, with the range between the two rivers.
HILLS BETWEEN THE JUMNA AND GANGES.
  Shingle and Sandstone.—The beds of shingle are of enormous thickness, and alternate with the sandstone. The former precisely resemble the shingle in the beds of the existing great rivers of the country, and consist of boulders of granite, gneiss, mica slate, quartz, hornblende schist, and traps; and every other rock, through which these rivers hold their course. If the beds of the Jumna and Ganges were to be upheaved, in the same way as those of former rivers, the appearance of the strata would be exactly similar. The sandstone consists either of grains of pure quartz, with different proportions of mica, or of an admixture of the other ingredients so common in all river sands. The presence of oxyd of iron causes a great variety in colour, from red to gray, whilst the induration of the rock appears to depend on the proportion of carbonate of lime. In the more easterly limit opposite Hurd war, as well as other places, the stone is quarried for building; and in many localities where it is crystalline, it is highly valuable in architecture. On the Jumna are the remains of an ancient hunting palace, built by the emperor Shah Juhan at the end of the 17th century; and although now in utter ruin, amongst its fragments are capitals of columns, and scolloped arch work, &c. cut in this sandstone, which prove it to be well adapted for architectural purposes. It is easily worked, and the mixture of mica gives two splitting surfaces. On exposure to weather, however, it exfoliates and crumbles, as is conspicuously shown in some lintels, still in position at Badshahmuhul. The colours of the clays are endless; and a light blue variety, which is found under the marl, as well as higher up in the series, where it contains fresh-water shells, is exceedingly pure. The strata of this blue clay are thin, but those of the other varieties are of all dimensions.
  Lignite.—Carbonaceous matter occurs throughout the sandstones, either in detached fragments exhibiting vegetable origin, or in strata or seams composed of sandstone and lignite in equal proportions. Lignite is also found in the marl, but generally in the form of black dust; leaving, on its removal, an indistinct, vegetable impression. In one instance, I also met with it in the shingle strata. It has never been found in sufficient abundance to excite an inquiry as to its adaptation for (Economical purposes; though it is common to the whole of this tract of mountains. Eastward of the Ganges it has been found, to the north of the Moradabad district; and it agrees in every respect with that found elsewhere. It has also been met with at points still more easterly; but the examination of that tract has been very slight. The most interesting point at which I have found lignite, is at the mouth of the Ka- lowala Pass, one of the entrances into the Deyra Dhoon, from the plains. A stratum or bed of yellow and red sand, about 18 inches thick, is there completely charged with lignite, either in long flattened masses, or in transverse sections of trunks of trees, which show, by their elliptical form, effects of vertical pressure. The lignite, in these cases, constitutes merely the outer covering; the interior of the trunk being composed of the sandstone matrix. The bed is enveloped in strata of the marl, abounding in the remains of animals ; and both the lignite bed and the marl, appear at this point most distinctly to have been deposited in a hollow; the beds, at their lateral extremities gradually attenuating, until they meet the sandstone rock; and the lower surface being concave. Although the marl is evidently limited at this spot, it seems to exist so generally in extended strata, that, supposing it to have formed tracts of marsh land, those tracts must have been very extensive. I have before remarked, that 1 have seen the marl only on the southern limits of these hills, between the Jumna and Ganges. In crossing the former river, however, the same stratum, with the same organic remains, is met with on the north of the mountain ridge, on which the town of Nahun stands. Here the upheavement has been more violent than elsewhere; and the point of junction of this tract with the higher Himalayas is consequently much dislocated. It is necessary to state, that there are appearances of trap in the neighbourhood of these disturbances; a fact which may lead hereafter to an interesting geological disquisition on the point of junction. Fossil wood, apparently dicotyledonous, abounds in the sandstone. The woody fibre is generally perfect, but impregnated with the sandstone, and frequently mixed with carbonaceous matter; in which case the fossil is black, and on fracture has the appearance of an intimate mixture of coal and sand, or of an imperfect coal. The only remains of animals yet found are fragments of tortoises.
   Marl, with Organic Remains.—As the marl is in greatest abundance in this section, I will now give an account of its organic remains; confining myself to classes and genera. These fossils are in appearance perfect, and the deep black colour which they have derived from hydrate of iron, renders them ornamental. The medullary cavities are, in many cases, filled with pyrites, and in others with pure white crystallized carbonate of lime. The greater part of the fossils, already procured, is from the deposit in the Kalowala Pass; and as my collection is not only large, but abundant in different genera, the number already found in such a limited space, indicates the great variety of animal remains, which a diligent and extensive search may produce. Teeth, and the more solid part of the bones, are found in the greatest quantity. Most of the former are perfect, and as sharp in their outline as when the animals existed; and even in the fragments, the sharpness of the fracture proves, that they were quietly deposited in the sediment in which they are found. The following is a list of the fossils already discovered in the marl:—
TESTACEA.
  Besides these more easily determinable remains, there have been found a number of incisor teeth, which I cannot assign to any genus; also quantities of bones, in fragments, and portions of ribs, one of which must have belonged to a large animal; also vertebrae, metatarsal or carpal bones, &c. With the exception of the teeth, the remains are generally in fragments, and separated; nor does it appear probable that we shall meet with anything approaching to a complete skeleton.
   In the tract then between the Jumna and Ganges, the fossil remains as yet discovered are thus disposed :—
   
  The mineral products are, carbonate of lime, the general cement of the whole formation, also in stalactites and stalagmites; selenite, in small tabular crystals; and pyrites, but apparently in the neighbourhood of organic remains only. Soda abounds throughout the mountains, efflorescing on the shingle and sandstone rocks; and the presence of this alkali may explain the partial disintegration of the boulders of which the shingle is composed : for, I believe, I am right in asserting, that every variety of boulder, from granite to quartz and sandstones, has been acted on : and when it happens that the boulders can be removed entire from the bed, they fall to pieces, either after exposure to the air for a time, or by pressure of the hand immediately. With regard to fractures in some of the boulders, and their consolidation on different planes, as in a slip of stratification, no remark whatever appears requisite, as these are the necessary consequences of that movement, which raised the beds from their horizontal position. There does not appear to be any further remark necessary on this tract, more than can be reserved for the general summary; I shall therefore proceed to describe the hills westward of the Jumna.
HILLS WEST OF THE JUMNA.
  These, as I before stated, consist of the same series of shingle, sand, clays, and marls; but they differ, in the beds of shingle being less abundant, although equally inclined, and in containing a different description of boulder. The rolled fragments eastward of the Jumna are all of primary or lower rocks, whilst those to the westward are confined to varieties of clay slate, and quartz. The marl, which, between the Jumna and Ganges shows itself in the southern limits, is here exposed at a point north of Nahun, cropping out on the northern slope of the mountain ; and the fossil remains resemble those found in the marl eastward of the Jumna, consisting of mammafers, crocodiles, tortoises, fishes, and shells. From Nahun to the plains there is a succession of sandstones and clays, without any abundance of shingle. The sandstone, which, in the vicinity of Nahun, is much indurated, and used for building, becomes softer on approaching the plains; long before reaching which, the whole formation consists of an interminable succession of sandstones and clays, the latter being in the greatest abundance, of every variety of colour, and dipping, on an average, 20° to the north. The topographical outline of these mountains, shows a considerable southing of upheavement, in the hills westward of the Jumna, as will be observed in the map: and the circumstance of the fossil remains abounding in the sandstones and clays in this tract, and not in that between the Jumna and the Ganges, may probably be due to the non-upheavement of the line on its prolongation eastward of the Jumna. The drawings which accompany this paperf show that the action, in all probability, was exerted irregularly; and although in the large scale we may lay down the dip and direction with accuracy, the former as varying from 15° to 35°, and the latter from N.E. to S.W., local details give very different results.
  The sandstone rock, from which the fossil remains sent to the Society’s Museum were extracted, reposes at the above angle, over numberless beds of clays, more or less rich in testaceous remains. The fossil bones lie in great abundance on the surface of the slopes in the neighbourhood of the sandstone, amongst the ruins of fallen cliffs, in the beds of water-courses, &c. The bones which we have had the good fortune to dig out of the rock are perfectly sharp, and in all their original perfection. I may here advert to a circumstance to which the preservation of the water-worn specimens is chiefly due. The sandstone is generally soft, but in the proximity of the fossils it becomes ferruginous, concretionary, and so hard as to turn the edge of the chisel; and thus protects the fossil from destruction in its progress, as a boulder along the torrent’s bed. These concretions are occasionally globular, and become singularly conspicuous, by the weathering of some of the ridges, when the mass of rock takes the appearance of huge spherical concretions piled confusedly on each other.
  The organic remains of this sandstone yet brought to light, belong to the following classes and genera: most of the species are new ; and the appearance of totally undescribed forms will add very considerably to our fossil genera. The new genera themselves will be the subject of separate accounts in their proper place.
REPTILIA.
   Many other fragments have been found, but so imperfect as to render a classification impossible. I may remark, that there appears to be no end to the variety as well as quantity of these remains; and we may expect to do much, even in this remote region, in advancing the inquiries respecting fossil zoology.
   Of each genus above mentioned, with the exception of the horse and the carnivora, I have already almost perfect skulls. The bones of the body, however, appear to have been much broken and mutilated; but it is a singular fact, that from many places where the fossils have been found as mere debris of fallen cliffs, fragments of bone have been obtained, which have admitted of being joined, although the fractured ends were coated with carbonate of lime, as if they had been fossilized separately. A beautiful example of this, is exhibited in an almost perfect rib of an elephant or mastodon, which is forwarded to the Society’s Museum, and which consisted of no less than eight pieces. A perfect humerus of a ruminant has been secured in this state; and the bones of two hind legs, namely, the upper part of the metatarsal connected to the lower portion of the tibia by the intermediate tarsal bones, with, also, the os calcis entire, and all the smaller bones of the tarsus equally so. These remains have belonged to an enormous animal, and, I believe, to the same genus as that of a skull in my possession, and now under description by my friend Dr. Hugh Falconer, of the Bengal medical service, and myself. Although I refrain from zoological details, I must mention, that we have an animal evidently forming a connecting link between the Pachj/dermata and Ruminantia, or between the Tapir or Palreotherium, and the latter order of mammalia. The hippopotamus of this sandstone appears to be a new species, having six incisive teeth, besides other peculiarities, particularly in the proportion of the bones of the head; the tusks also differ from those described by Cuvier in his Ossemens Fossiles. The great depth at which the marl lies beneath the upper strata, with the discovery in it of remains of the horse, is an interesting fact. In the sandstone strata the remains of the horse are by no means scarce. There appears, however, to be a local disposition in the deposits of these remains. In some places the hippopotamus, elephant, mastodon, crocodile, tortoise, &c., are found in abundance, with the remains of ruminants; in others the hippopotamus and the water reptiles are almost totally absent, and only the remains of ruminants and carnivora occur; all tending to prove that these animals were destroyed on the site of their habitats ; and that this former world was not more mysterious than the present; that there were vast tracts of marsh and river, with their attendant hippopotami and crocodiles in the waters, and elephants and mastodons in the neighbourhood ; and that there were other tracts free from water and marsh, and frequented by their natural inhabitants, ruminants, carnivora, &c.
   Dr. Falconer, in a note read at a meeting of the Asiatic Society of Calcutta, suggested the identity of this deposit with that near Prome, some of the fossils from which have been so beautifully lithographed in the Society’s Transactions!. The mastodons in the Sevalik strata are in great abundance; and as we have perfect skulls, we are enabled to form some opinion of the dentition and the change of teeth. Three of these skulls, now in my cabinet, have the front tooth worn, and the rear one coming into use; the whole line of teeth stretching on a surface of 19 inches, and forming an arc of 90°. The front tooth I cannot distinguish from that of the M. Latidens figured in the Geological Transactions; and the rear one, in the same animal, bears such perfect resemblance to the M. Elephantoides, that I cannot help risking the conjecture that the M. Latidens and the M. Elephantoides are one and the same animal; the specimens, from which the specific characters were taken, having been detached teeth.
   Bringing this forward in the way of suggestion may be of use, in ultimately leading to truth. The question, however, must be determined by a strict examination of specimens; and having advanced the above supposition, I will take care that the means shall be provided.

    The minerals in this tract, west of the Jumna, correspond with those to the eastward, with the exception of the presence of the gold, which occurs in the beds of the rivers in these mountains, both eastward of the Ganges, and westward of the Jumna; but I am not aware of its existence in the intermediate tract. Under Nahun, gold-washers are constantly employed during the dry months; their daily return varying from two annas to two rupees, or from 3d. to 4s. The process is extremely rude. A piece of board, a long wooden trough, a ladle made out of a gourd, a sieve of the large grass which grows so abundantly in this part of the country, and a piece of hollow bamboo with a little quicksilver, constitute the portable apparatus of these most primitive washers for the precious metal. A great deal of the gold-dust must necessarily be lost'by this method of proceeding; and all the mercury, as it is evaporated in open air. The grains of gold are not larger than the small scales of mica, so common in river sand ; and I have not heard that the metal has been found in large masses. This gold, too, has its localities, some streams being much richer than others. Where is the fountain head ? In some stratum of this alluvium, perhaps, yet to be discovered, as the streams have no connexion with the higher mountains. A description of the washers, and the method practised by them eastward of the Ganges, have been given in the Journal of the Asiatic Society; and as there is little difference in the apparatus used at both places, it is not necessary to refer to it further.
   Some of the fossils obtained by Mr. Colebrooke in the hills near Cooch Behar, and described by Mr. Pentlandf, are identical with some of those obtained by the present discovery; and as the former were found in the most eastern extremity of this line, it is possible that a careful examination would prove the existence of animal remains throughout the whole of the intermediate mountains; all the tract being probably tertiary. An inquiry into the difference between the hills bounded by the Ganges and Jumna, and those westward of the latter; and into the confused and interminable dislocations, without any flats in the former, and the more scattered ridges with the intermediate plateaux of the latter, would only lead to a disquisition on the general formation of the dhoons or valleys lying between the Sevalik hills and the great chain, which the limits of this communication will not admit, and must be left for future inquiry. It will be sufficient to state, that the general form of the mountains approaches more or less to a right angle, the long slope being covered with vegetation, and the crest terminating- in a perpendicular and generally mural cliff, which descends into the beds of the torrents. The scenery from these cliffs is most picturesque, and many of the passes or ghats up the torrents are bounded by gigantic walls of sandstone, varying both in height and character, and subject to all the tortuosities dependent on a river’s course, forcing its channel through a complication of mountains. This effect is considerably heightened by the pointed and jagged style of the outline, depending on that abundance of clay and carbonate of lime throughout the whole formation, which permits even the shingle-beds to hold up their pointed summits in the wildest manner imaginable. At places, a perfectly inaccessible needle of shingle raises its head far above the others, and is crowned by one solitary fir tree, Pinus longifolia. This conical form, produced in the clays by weathering, is sometimes magnificently displayed, by the whole face of a cliff, consisting of light pink, yellow, and blue clays, being externally decorated with small conical spires of the clay from top to bottom, a height of 1000 feet from the bed of the river. The origin of this structure is due simply to a little coping stone, of some harder material than the matrix of the strata, and upon which the weather does not act so rapidly as upon the clay. Under a bright sun, the beauty of these cliffs, with their illumined pinnacles, is exquisite; particularly westward of the Jumna. I have before adverted to the presence of great abundance of lime, forming stalactites, and the cement of the sandstone and conglomerate. There is another striking method of deposition on the surface'of the large stones which lie in the beds of the rivers, and which, during the greater part of the year, are in contact with the water. The substance is very similar in appearance to the coarse brown paper made in this country; and is produced by the water, while washing the stone, depositing its lime, and entangling the finer particles of vegetable matter, sand and mica, until the stone acquires a superficial coating, of a brownish yellow colour, which on removal resembles the substance before mentioned.

