I have been strongly recommended, by several friends, to confine my Answer to Mr. Neill’s “Address” within the smallest possible limits; but as it is not improbable that this pamphlet may be hereafter referred to, in connection with the history of the Wernerian Society, which now bids fair to become eminent amongst its fellows, I have thought it better to risk the tedium of the uninterested reader, than to pass over any facts of importance. It may be right also to mention here, that whatever may be the opinion of the reader after the perusal of this “Answer,” I do not wish to put him on Ms guard against receiving impressions from any thing which Mr. Keill may afterwards publish relative to the Wernerian Natural History Society, —a method of exciting prejudice, which that gentleman has employed against me in his “ Address;” but, as I have said all that I have to say upon this subject, and as my object of exciting an investigation into the condition of the Wernnerian Society is attained, I now decline any further discussion upon the matter ; which, indeed, could serve no other purpose than that of widening the breach which already unhappily exists between Mr. Neill and myself. H. H. C. A PAMPHLET, bearing the title of An Address to the Members of the Wernerian Natural History Society, by their Secretary, has recently been put in circulation by Mr. Neill, and a copy has been sent to me by that gentleman. On the perusal of its contents, I was surprized to find that, though it assumes the character of “a defence” of others, it is virtually little else than an attack upon me, and some gentlemen who are termed my “secret friends,” for drawing the attention of the public to what I consider to be abuses in the Wernerian Society. Feeling considerable doubt in my own mind, as to the necessity or propriety of my answering such a paper, I have sought the advice of several individuals, in the hope that I should receive the support of their judgment against a line of action which I was very loth to pursue. In asking their opinion, I made these gentlemen fully aware of the respect and esteem I entertained for Mr. Neill in his particular vocations. I mentioned to them my regret that, in connection with the Wernerian Society, I had been forced to view him as the friendly instrument of the person whose champion he now stands forth confessed; and I assured them that, if it could possibly be avoided, I would most anxiously refrain from adding "gall to the wormwood’' which, from the bitter tone of his “Address,” he seemed already to have tasted. But it was argued, on the other hand, by my friends, 1st, That as the Edinburgh Journal of Natural and Geographical Science, (in which the exposure of the misdirection of the Wernerian Society was published anonymously) was unable to notice the Address, on account of its author having cast from himself the dignified bearing towards the editors of that work, which good breeding might have suggested, and singled me out for personal vituperation ; and as I had been careless of admitting to him, privately, that I was the sole author of the obnoxious article, against which his pamphlet is directed,—thereby giving him some colour for the personality of his attack,—it might probably be considered incumbent upon me to answer his accusations. And, 2dly, it was placed before me in a strong light, that from the circumstances of our relative age and status in Edinburgh,—from the long period during which Mr Neill had been known, and from the respect which was paid to him, by scientific men,—and particularly from the esprit de corps which prevails amongst all old citizens, and which may be especially baneful to any one who is placed under the imputation of being a “young stranger,”—if I did not explain and vindicate my conduct from the charges which were preferred against me by Mr. Neill, a most injurious feeling would inevitably prevail against me in Edinburgh, and might even spread its contagion amongst my personal friends. The importance of these considerations was urgent, and compelled me to the course I have taken ; and I sincerely hope this will plead my excuse for thus obtruding myself upon the notice of those amongst whom I have reason to suppose Sir. Neill has circulated his pamphlet, in which he so lavishly, and I trust unjustly, charges me with “malignity,” calumny,” “effrontery,” and “falsity;” and garnishes my patronymic with such a variety of adjuncts, as the boasting editor,” the “ self-constituted censor of Edinburgh,” “ raw lad,” “ young stranger” &c. &c. The possession of youth seems, from the repetition of the taunt, to rank amongst my heinous offences ; but I would suggest to Mr. Neill that, if a man does properly what he undertakes to do, he is not thought any worse of, for being in the vigour of his youth, by those of his seniors who have nothing to fear. And I would remark, by quoting the language of Pitt, as far as my memory serves me, that “the atrocious crime of being a young man I shall neither attempt to palliate nor deny ; but content myself with wishing that I may be one of those whose weakness and follies may cease with their youth, and not of that number who become testy and garrulous with old age, and ignorantly bigoted in spite of experience;” And further, I am happy to have it in my power to assure Mr. Neill that I have never been reminded by any other person of my being a stranger; and that the reception I have uniformly experienced has satisfied me that an Englishman is not considered as a stranger in Scotland.
In thus  complying with the wishes of my friends my sole object is gently to wipeoff the aspersions which have been so indictively hurled upon me, and I trust that I shall not be infected with the revengeful spirit which I might run some hazard of catching from the perusal of the angry effusion of Mr. Neill. Indeed, from the disparity of our years, I feel a sort of pledge within myself that I shall be able to treat with a respectful consideration of pity, what I ought to view as the result of a peevish irritability; and I therefore feel naturally disposed to be lenient in the castigation I might be inclined to inflict on a younger man, or on one more able to bear it. I trust, however, that Mr. Neill will recollect the remark of Horne Tooke, that “the experience of much injustice will cause the forbearance of injury to appear like kindness,” and that he will estimate my motives accordingly. The “Address” of Mr. Neill is stated to be “a vindication of the Wernerian Society—its President—and Secretary,” from charges which were made, or supposed to be made, against them, in an article contained in the 10th No. of the Journal of which I am joint-editor. Now, for the purpose of distinctly relating all the circumstances connected with that article, and the events which have risen out of it, I shall declare openly that it was entirely written by me, and that so little do I observe in it, or in my subsequent conduct, to be ashamed of, that I now stand forward to explain and defend that which I have done. I shall therefore speak as if my name were attached to the article in question, and anxiously avoid connecting the Journal with what I have further to say. As to the right by which I, as an editor of a Journal, took upon myself the office of “Censor” over the management of a public scientific society, of which I was not a member, that is a question which must be left to the determination of the public, and not of an implicated party; and perhaps will be found to depend principally upon the truth of the allegations which I have made respecting it. That some censor,  who may be unshackled by local connections, is wanted in Edinburgh, is, I fear, sufficiently apparent; for the state of natural science, and in particular, of what is called “natural history,” is truly alarming. I can declare that, during the four years of my residence in Edinburgh, I have been grieved to see the Museum of the University closed to the student who did not purchase certain nominal privileges at an exorbitant price, and, what was more disgraceful, the total uselessness of that establishment to the man of science ; —I have felt indignant at the perusal of the syllabus of lectures which the Professor of Natural History puts into the hands of his pupils, and which is only calculated to delude ;—and I have beheld with disgust a coterie brooding like a night-mare over the Wernerian Natural History Society, till there was little remained of it but the mockery cast by its name, upon opinions which are now only to be found in the pages of the history of error. In his “Address” Mr. Neill attempts to involve the members of the Society in support of this coterie, by pretending that I have attacked the Society, and ingeniously volunteering a defence. But I must here repeat (what I have so often elsewhere asserted) that the remarks which I have made upon the mismanagement of this Institution, could not, and did not apply to the Society, but to those who were its managers; and further, that these remarks could only become applicable to Mr. Neill, if he should appear as the champion of the managers, which I presume from his pamphlet he now does. Of the Wernerian Society I can with pleasure say, that its active members merit the esteem of good and liberal-minded men, for the independent and public-spirited course they have recently chosen; and that whatever I have done or said respecting it, has been dictated by the best intentions for its increasing welfare and prosperity. In an early part of his pamphlet, Mr. Neill attempts to excite a prejudice against me, by laying much stress upon my having “testified friendship” for him, and upon “ the kindness” with which he has “ ever treated me;” and afterwards alludes to his having given me some letters of introduction to scientific friends in London. But the friendship which I have felt and expressed for Mr. Neill, has been that which he holds in common with all honourable and upright men, whose pursuits are similar to my own. And, though I should be sorry to have the imputation of ingratitude placed upon me, I must be excused if I say that I do not remember to have received any extraordinary "kindness” from Mr. Neill, of which he would be entitled to boast; and that I am entirely ignorant of the time or manner of its exhibition. I have always had reason, in my slight connection with that gentleman, to be pleased with his amiable and communicative disposition, and have invariably left his company with a desire to return to it; but I have never visited at his house,—I have never met him in society,—I have not even spoken to him at twenty different times; and as to the letters of introduction, all that I recollect of them is, that in March last, when I was about to visit London, I mentioned to him that I should be much pleased to be made acquainted with any of his scientific friends in town, and that I should be glad to be the bearer of any parcel or letters which he was desirous to send to the south; of which offer he said he would take advantage. He accordingly sent to me three sealed letters, with an intimation on the envelope which enplosed them, that he had put my name on the corner of each, so that I might make acquaintance with the parties, if inclined. But I can detect nothing very remarkable in this, independently of the mode of “introduction,” which perhaps may be considered novel; and, even if I had exposed the public conduct of mr. Neill with a view to injure him, (which I solemnly declare I never did,) I do not see that he would have any right to enter the want of gratitude for favours received, as a plea against me. It may, however, serve for a lesson to those who accept letters of introduction, without reflecting upon the advantage that may afterwards be taken of them. The ‘‘ plain, unvarnished tale” which has given so much of- fence, and which has been the subject of so much correspondence between Mr. Neill, myself, and others, besides giving birth to the Secretary’s “ Address,” may be told in a very few words :— I, as editor of a scientific Journal, which I conceive has a right to interest itself in the proceedings of every public scientific society, received information, upon the accuracy of which I thought I could depend, and accordingly made use of it in an article I was then writing. It related to what took place at a public meeting of a Society, and I received it from a person who was present. I was therefore, according to all ordinary rules, entitled to say, that what I stated was “upon evidence and when that information was subsequently confirmed by the testimony of other persons, who were also present, I held myself entitled to state it with confidence.” 
The readers of the Edn. Journ. of Nat. and Geog. Science, will be aware that this subject has been already pretty fully discussed ; and even now. On this subject I may remark, that I am well aware of the difficulty which every lecturer or professor must experience for some time, in so arranging his course as to give a proper view of all the different subjects upon which he professes to lecture. I can understand how, for the first three or four years of his professorship, he will always find himself in arrears at the end of his appointed time; and could excuse his repeating for such a period, in his syllabus, pledges, which, though he had hitherto found himself incapable of redeeming them, he still hoped and expected to recover in the succeeding course. But when a professor, year after year, repeats the identical promise which he has as often found it impossible to perform, and which he is bound not to make, unless he at the same time attempts by some additional effort or arrangement to accomplish it,—there appears to be ground for something more than a charge of negligence or incapacity. In such conduct there is a monopolizing spirit of exclusion which amounts to actual dishonesty; and though it may be said that every one who pays for the ticket under these promises, has his redress if they be not fulfilled,—that proceedings would lie in a court of law, as in all cases of obtaining money under false pretences,—I view the circumstance in a very different light. So long as this syllabus is annually issued to the pupils, the impression may continue that the Professor is qualified to deliver such a course as is therein defined; and the necessity of a division of labour will be overlooked. But to show the actual need of such a measure, I cannot do better than quote a passage from Mr. Macleay’s, the more particularly as it is expressly applied to the chair of Natural History in this University, and as it will sufficiently authorize my allusion to this matter. After speaking of the melancholy state of zoological instruction in this country, the author continues.
But though the weight of evidence was in favour of the statement I made, it afterwards turned out to be wrong. The whole fact, which mr. Neill has magnified into one of such importance, was simply this:—A letter was delivered to the chairman at a public meeting of the Wernerian Society, and two names were read by him as signatures attached to it, he adding “Etc.” after reading these two names. Unfortunately, the persons with whom I conversed on the subject did not hear this concluding apogiatura; and if they had, I am not aware that they would have had the ingenuity to conceive the “etc.” to be another expression for the name of the gentleman who read the letter. They therefore, upon the evidence of their hearing, confidently asserted to me, (though the grounds of their assertion were not known to me at the time,) that no such name was appended to the document when it was read. Subsequently to the period of this meeting, however, Mr, Neill had circulated, amongst certain members of the Wernerian Society, a printed paper which he terms “Extracts,” purporting to be notes from the minute-book of the Society, relating to the history of the Library Committee, and in which he stated that the name of Mr. Arnott, who happened to be chairman at that meeting, was signed to the letter in question. This, upon the evidence I had received, I took the liberty of contradicting in the 10th No. of the Journal in which 1 was engaged, using such language as, I believe, would not have been uncalled for, had my information been correct; I was, perhaps, at the time the more authorized to contradict Mr. Neill’s statement, that I had several assurances, to oppose the statement contained in his “Extracts” and that, moreover, there was an actual misstatement in his saying that the letter was signed by “others,” and a want of candour in suppressing the name of Dr. Gillies, who was the only other subscriber, and who was entirely unconnected with the old Committee, with which, however, it was attempted to confound the present one. To show how any other person might have fallen into the same mistake, I may quote the following passage from a correction of my error, which was published in the 11th No. of the Journal. “Moreover, we Have the authority of Hr. Falconar and Dr. Gillies to state, that it was their full impression that the letter was only signed by themselves when delivered by Mr. Falconar to the chair; and that, from Mr. Arnott’s name riot having been read to the Society, they believed, until the time of our discovering the error, that their signatures alone were attached. Thus, it will be evident that the fact of Mr. Arnott’s name being also signed, could only be known to himself, and to the secretary, in whose possession the letter was deposited. To these gentlemen, it has been said, we might have applied for information; but had there even appeared to us to be any room for doubt, Mr. Arnott was at the time absent from Scotland, and delicacy restrained us from interrogating Mr. Neill, whose connection with the circular was of rather a dubious nature. Public opinion, then, could alone be our guide; and to this we confidently trusted. We did not wantonly make an assertion which we knew to be false, but reported an opinion which was entertained by numbers of the Society, as well as several visitors who were present at the meeting.”— Shortly after the 10th No. of the Journal was in the publisher’s hands, but prior to the day of publication, I ascertained from Mr. Neill (who showed me the letter of requisition,) that Mr. Arnott’s name was actually appended to it, and I confess I was not a little astonished to see it. But if I was surprized to find that Mr. Arnott’s name was then attached to the letter, I was still more amazed when I subsequently learnt from that gentleman that his signature had been affixed to the letter before it was presented to the chair; though, happening himself to be chairman of the meeting, he did not read his own name, but merely added “Sic.” after the other two signatures. However, to correct my inaccurate statement as far as lay in my power, without entirely stopping the publication, I immediately got printed and inserted on the very face of the book, a fly-slip, wherein the reader was warned against the erroneous passage; and as a portion of the London copies were already on their way, I dispatched the necessary “slips” after them by the mail, with express directions that not a copy should be allowed to leave the shop without having its slip inserted. It appears, however, and Mr. Neill makes a flourish of trumpets thereupon, that Dr. Traill was able to find one copy without it in Liverpool. Thus I presume I did every thing that it was possible for me to do under the circumstances. It was totally out of my power to substitute a new leaf, at that late period of the month, for the one which contained the inaccurate passage ; and notwithstanding Mr. Neill’s technical quibbles about the meaning of the word “ cancel,” I declare that I never mentioned to him my intention to suppress the leaf:—to neutralize the incorrect statement by a fly-slip, was all I could do, prior to the next month’s publication. Mr. Neill also asserts that I protested strenuously,” in my conversation with him. I know not how to reconcile this part of the “Address” with the fairness of that “ spirit and integrity’’ which ought to have been shown even in his accusations against me. I must positively deny any such assertion. I told hlr. Neill that the statement originally rested upon the responsibility of another ; but I never, in any way, attempted to lead him to believe that I was not the author of the whole of the article, or that I, as one of the editors, was not responsible for whatever had been published in the Journal in an anonymous form. It will be seen throughout the whole of the correspondence printed in Mr. Neill’s “ Address,’’ that he calls upon me incessantly to give up my informant. The notion that, us an editor, I should be prevailed upon to divulge the names of gentlemen, who had communicated to me facts connected with the mal-administration of a public trust, was certainly unauthorized; and I cannot conceive what the gentleman, who has been so long acquainted with periodical literature, could possibly think of, when he made such an application but his statement, that I refused both to give up the names of my friends, and to make any apology myself, is not formed upon that principle which I would have expected from Mr. Neill, who, according to my ideas of the golden rule, should not only have stated the truth, but the whole truth. If Mr. Neill had not used that most uncandid mode of passing over a letter, without denying that it had been received, by referring to it as “ partly private,” and then saying that his answer will at once explain its general contents,—I think the reader of his “ Address” would have seen, that in my letter of 7th July, I attempted in respectful and conciliatory language to express my concern for the error which I had committed. But let the letter speak for itself. “to Patrick Neill, Esq, “ Deah Sir, Gardner's Crescent, 7th July 1830. “ Having this morning obtained an interview with Mr. Arnott, I am now able to answer your letter, dated 30th June. “It, however, appears to be necessary, in the first place, to remind you that there is now no public contradiction of the statement in the circular (i. e. “ the Extracts,”) respecting, Mr. Arnott’s name; for the error of which you complain is corrected on the very face of the Journal. And every explanation I choose to enter into, after that correction, is entirely between ourselves as individuals, and solely prompted by my desire to preserve your friendship. “I have already stated to you that the information upon which I acted was received from an individual who was present at the meeting alluded to, (but whose name I do not feel myself at liberty to mention,) and as that information was afterwards confirmed by some collateral circumstances which came to my  knowledge, I considered myself, at the time, entitled to say, that my assertion was made “on evidence, and with confidence.” Having now, however, ascertained that the statement I made was incorrect, I am most anxious to do away with the erroneous impression it was calculated to convey, and I am ready either to cancel the offensive passage by printing a new and corrected leaf, to be inserted in the volume when completed, or to write an explanatory article in the next number of the Journal, according to your option. This, with what I have already done, will I trust be satisfactory to you. “To prove to you that my remarks were never intended to be applied to you, I need only refer you to the observations respecting you which I made in the latter part of the article on the Wernerian Society. Indeed, the fact of my reading to you, in your own counting-room, the passage referred to, before the publication of the Journal, certainly did not indicate much hostility to you. And I must express my regret at having unwillingly given you the annoyance which the misapplication of my remarks, and the inaccuracy of that particular passage have occasioned. “In conclusion, allow me to assure you that I entertain the same esteem for you I have ever felt, and that I shall always be ready to receive your hand with the same grasp of friendship to which it has been accustomed.—I am, &c. “ Henry H. Cheek.”
I know not whether Mr. Neill was in fairness authorized to construe this remark into a desire that this letter should be held to be private, and on that plea to suppress it; but I can state, that I merely wished to convey the idea that any further explanation must be made “between ourselves as individuals,” in contradistinction to the public and printed correction. And I think that the context (which certainly could not be gathered from Mr. Neill’s answer) will convey that idea to any candid reader, and not that I wished the letter which contained that explanation to be made private. 
I must leave it to the reader’s consideration, whether, if Mr. Neill had been desirous of giving an ingenuous narrative of the facts, and of avoiding the use of any unnecessary censure, he M'ould have suppressed this letter : the injustice of this proceeding appears to me to be so flagrant, that I cannot trust myself to make any remarks upon it. Surely, if he had any doubts as to the propriety of publishing the letter, he might have asked my permission to do so; instead of which he threatens, in his letter of the 8th July, that he will “only allude to it.” In my next letter to him, dated 31st July, I took occasion to mention that there was nothing between us which I held to be private, and that he was at perfect liberty to make what use of my letters he thought proper. But on the 2d August I received the “Address,” with the mutilated correspondence. Even after I had discovered my error, until I Avas informed by Mr. Arnott that he had signed his name prior to the letter being delivered to him as chairman, I certainly considered, as I stated in my letter of 29th June, that though my assertion was incorrect, it was “not entirely unfoundedbut besides suppressing the above letter, which is a virtual retraction of that opinion, Mr. Neill has the unfairness to make my former statement the apology for additional abuse. In the same page, (18,) Mr. Neill, notwithstanding his being in possession of the above letter, states that I had never made any proper apology, even at the date of the Address.” I am compelled, then, to enter into further detail. It will be observed by those whose eyesight is good, that there is a paragraph of non-pareil print cramped into a note at the bottom of the 10th page of the Address ; but which, nevertheless, contains an allusion to a fact of some considerable importance. About the beginning of July I received a visit from my excellent friend Dr. Gillies, who stated that he had been conversing with Mr. Neill on the subject of our unfortunate differences, in consequence of a letter he had received from that gentleman; and that he called upon me in the capacity of the mutual friend of Mr. Neill and myself, to suggest the propriety of a reference to two gentlemen, of whatever was in dispute between us. I told Dr. Gillies that I was most anxious to do every thing in my power to appease Mr. Neill, whose feelings were evidently much irritated,—except that I did not feel myself at liberty to mention the name of the gentleman who had communicated to me the circumstances relating to Mr. Arnott’s signature. I, however, immediately agreed to a reference of any further public, or private apology, which might be considered due from me to Mr. Neill; and Dr. Gillies, whose good offices in this affair, both Mr. Neill and myself must appreciate highly, was kind enough to say that he would take upon himself to make a written proposition to us both. Accordingly, in a few days, I received the following letter from Dr. Gilies. My reply was as follows: “ To Dr. Gillies, My Dear Sir, I have just received your letter, proposing a reference of the difference between Mr. Neill and myself to the decision of two friends. Your praiseworthy desire to promote peace will meet with the highest estimation from all good men, and I assure you that I myself feel proud of the possession of such a friend. It will, however, be necessary for me, on giving my most cordial acquiescence to your proposal, to state what I understand to be the matter for reference. “I made an incorrect statement in the Journal, with respect to a paper signed by Mr. Neill; but, on discovering its inaccuracy, I immediately contradicted it. And I have since offered to Mr. Neill either to cancel the leaf which contains the statement at the end of the volume, or to write an explanatory article in the forthcoming No. Mr. Neill, in a letter dated 8th instant, has chosen the latter. This, therefore I shall most willingly do. But Mr. Neill further requires, first, that I shall give up to him the name of the gentleman from whom I received my information. To this I refuse to accede ; for I consider myself answerable for every statement which I insert in the Journal without the author’s name affixed; though, as I mentioned to Mr. Neill, the accuracy of the particular assertion in question originally rested on the responsibility of another. “And, secondly, Mr. Neill requires an apology from myself. I may mention to you, that on making myself responsible to Mr. Neill for the misstatement and its correction, by refusing to give up my informant’s name, I offered what I considered to be a personal apology to him,—though, by his last letter, he appears not to have understood my meaning. In a letter dated 7th inst., I wrote to him, ‘ To prove to you tliat my remarks were never intended to be applied to you, I need only refer you to the observations respecting you which 1 made in the latter part of the article on the Wernerian Society. Indeed, the fact of my reading to you in your own counting-room the passage referred to, before the publication of the Journal, certainly did not indicate much hostility to you. And I must express my regret at having unwillingly given you the annoyance which tlie misapplication of my remarks, and the inaccuracy of that particular passage, have occasioned.’ “ But as Mr. Neill is dissatisfied with this expression of my regret, and reiterates his requisition for a further apology, I will leave it to referees to decide whether any, and what kind of further personal apology is called for from me, besides the public statement, which will be made in the Journal And, 2dly, if it be thought necessary to have the nature of the public explanation also submitted to reference, the Editors of the Journal can have no objection thereto. If, however, the latter question is to be referred, immediate steps for the reference must be taken, or the publication of the explanation must be delayed to the 12th number of the Journal, as the printers are now occupied with that part of the next month’s number, where it ought to be inserted, “The above, however, I agree to do, exclusively on the understanding that all recollection and written mention of the matter shall thereafter drop, and that Mr. Neill and I shall hold ourselves thereafter on the same friendly footing as before.” (I then named my referee, in case Mr. Neill should also have agreed to Dr. Gillies’ proposal; and at the same time intimated, that I considered it would be improper for any Member of the Wernerian Society to be connected with the reference on eitlier side.) I heard nothing further on the subject of the reference till the 21st July, when I received a communication from Dr. Gillies, front Avhich I learnt that Mr. Neill, avoiding the usual practice in these matters, had written to him that if Mr. Arnott should hold the apology contained in my letter of 7th July as sufficient, he would state in his “ Address,” (which it appears he was determined to print at aU hazards,) that I had made such an apology ; and he further observed, in answer to Dr. Gillies’ intimation,—that I objected to any member of the Wernerian Society being connected with the reference,—“ I never doubted,” to use Mr. Neill’s own words, “ that he (Mr. Arnott) would have been to Mr. Cheek the most acceptable referee I could name.” In a letter to me, dated 2d August, Mr. Neill even goes so far as to appoint Dr. Gilies as my referee. He says, “ you are in a mistake in thinking that I did not acquiesce in the suggestion of a reference as to the ‘ kind of apology’ which was proper, as far as I was concerned individually. I fully ac- quiesced in this, and at once offered to abide satisfied with any apology which Dr. Gillies, and Mr, Arnott should concur in holding as sufficient. It was impossible for me to imagine that these gentlemen would not be acceptable to you as referees ; for they already knew the merits of the case, and I considered them as your friends as well as mine.” If, however, Mr. Neill had taken Mr. Arnott’s advice, his line of action would have been very different from that which he has pursued. In a letter to me, dated 20th July, Mr. Amott says, “I will write to Mr. Neill to say that if any more personal apology is necessary, it ought to be drawn out, and indeed the whole business referred to two or more friends, which I hope may terminate the disagreeable business.” Indeed I may say of Mr. Amott, as well as of Dr. Gillies, that he has shown himself to be a true friend to both parties, and that I place the highest value on his good intentions.
This peculiar mode of shuffling off a reference, without refusing it, merits remark; but it was not quite consonant with my notions of the customs of this world, and I accordingly wote to Dr. Gillies, as follows “My dear Sir, July 22. 1830. In case I should not be able to meet with you in the morning, I write to say, that, from Mr. Neill’s answer to your proposition, it is evident that any thing but a friendly arrangement is his object I am sorry that your good en- deavours should have been so unsuccessful; but I hope you will not attribute your failure to Mr. Neill’s own feelings; for I still rely upon the belief that his unwarped judgement would have guided him better. But he ‘cannot serve both God and Mammon.’ “I received yesterday a letter from Mr. Amott, which I answered at great length, acquainting him with the actual state of the affair. He also is anxious to promote an eclaircissement. If hostility be destined to prevail, it at least is no fault of our friends. As Mr. Neill treats your proposal for reference  cavalierly, I cannot, injustice to myself and to the gentleman who so kindly undertook the duty of a referee, submit to be any longer trifled with by delay, and must accordingly intimate to my friend today that his services are no longer requisite.—Sincerely yours, “ Heney H. Cheek.” In the note, (p. 10) which contains the only allusion in the “Address” to this proposed reference, Mr. Neill makes the excuse for not having acceded thereto, that he had received a letter from a member of the Wernerian Society, (Dr. Gillies,) suggesting the propriety of referring all differences to the decision of a friend nominated by each party. But if Mr. Neill had been exact in his quotation from Dr. Gillies’ letter, he would have found himself unable to employ this subterfuge. Thus I think it is sufficiently evident, that I was both willing and anxious to make any further private apology which might be considered necessary, and that I made a fair offer to that effect. One would have thought that this might have satisfied the most fastidious mortal; but no! Mr. Neill was not to be appeased. In truth he had other objects in view. An apology from me was quite a secondary consideration. My “secret friends’’ and “ advisers behind the curtain,” were the prey he sought for; and, not content with impertinently charging Mr. Falconar and Dr. Gillies with being my informants, nor with making a most unbecoming allusion to visitors being guilty of abusing the confidence of the Society, and acting as my spies,— mr. Neill writes in the last letter I received from him, (dated 16th Aug.) that the dispute is not between him and me; The letter of Dr. Knox, inserted in the Appendix, will answer for the share he had as my informant; to Dr. Gillies I have communicated this ridiculous charge, that he may vindicate himself in his own way ; and I had not the pleasure of knowing Mr. Falconar at the time of the publication of my atrocious article. The imputation cast upon the visitors, (from whom Mr. Neill pretends that I insinuated my information was obtained,) is certainly most unhandsome, and moreover betrays an excessive jealousy. What could take place at a public meeting of the Society that ought not to be reported, I know not, provided it be done correctly and fairly. But the whole of my remarks amounted to this, that there were several visitors present at the meeting when the celebrated letter was read. I thus, as I conceive, did every thing in my power to give Mr. Neill a satisfactory private apology. But this was not all. I published in the 11th No. of the Journal a correction of the erroneous statement, and made a public apology to mr. Neill in the following terms:—So highly do we estimate this gentleman’s public and private worth, that we do not for one moment hesitate to declare, that the remarks we made were never intended to attach to him, and that we are concerned at having occasioned him the slightest uneasiness.” It appears from an envelope dated 2d August, which inclosed the copy of the “ Address” sent to me, that a friend had offered to obtain for Mr. Neill a proof-sheet of this article before the time of publication, if he desired it; but he declined it, by saying that he “ could not ask any favour from mr. Cheek.’’ I, however, sent him a copy of the Journal containing it, on the 31st July, never dreaming but that, as he was aware that I had an explanatory article in the press, he would delay the printing of his “ Address,” until he knew what explanation and apology I should give. The reader may judge of my surprise, then, when, on the 2d August, I received a packet from Mr. Neill, containing his Address,” and a letter acknowledging the receipt of the 11th No. of the Journal. I was thunderstruck at Mr. Neill’s precipitation ; and the more that the opening paragraph of his letter contained this statement. But he, who complains so loudly against me for not stopping the publication of a periodical work, to correct and reprint a leaf, did not even paste a corrigendum to his pamphlet, which was independent of time; though he felt the justice of privately making the above communication to me. It is true that the Address” was inclosed in a printed envelope, acknowledging that he was aware of my public apology prior to the circulation of the pamphlet. But did this envelope accompany all the copies? I believe not. Indeed, I have reason to know instances, where, from its not having been sent with the “ Address,” the parties believed that I had made no apology, public or private, and of course formed a very injurious opinion of my conduct. Such is “the head and front of my offending,” the discussion of which occupies nearly half of Mr. Neill’s pamphlet of twenty-six pages. But I trust that I have now shown that I did not knowingly make the erroneous assertion, and that, on discovering my error, I did every thing in my power to retrieve the fault,—a fault which I hope Mr. Neill will no longer impute to “ malign intention,” or to a willingness to state that which I knew to be false. I declare that, from the nature of the evidence I received, I believed, at the time, that the statement, which I contradicted, was not true, and I expressed my belief in terms which perhaps might have been warranted, had I been in the right; but the same habit of mind which may lead me into a hasty expression of my sentiments, will also, I trust, when I in the wrong, be the first to prompt the fullest apology which a gentleman can be expected to give; and I hope my conduct on this occasion has been consonant wtih that character. No one, I am sure, who knows Mr. Neill’s naturally good temper, will for a moment suppose that he could be really so angry at a young man unless there were some deeper-seated cause than this, for the unusual violence of expression which pervades his pamphlet, and for the passion by which he seems to have been agitated, throughout the whole affair. As soon as I discovered my error, I published a “errata,” correcting the misstatement ; but this only served to exasperate. I publicly explained; it would not appease him. I offered to cancel the leaf at the end of the volume ; but it was of no avail. I made a private apology; he would not receive it. I agreed to refer; but all was in vain. My once kind friend, to whom I might with truth apply the appellation he bestows upon another, of “ an amiable naturalist,” refused to listen to any thing I could say ; and though he states that I “had testified friendship for him,”—that I came to him “with smiles and with professions of esteem,” and although the very article in question bears evidence of the high opinion I entertained of him as an individual, still were my attempts to pacify him fruitless. Besides this principal topic of Mr. Neill’s pamphlet, there are several minor points in the obnoxious article on the Wernerian Society, which are made the subject of animad version in the Address.” These I shall now enter upon generally, and add some remarks which occur to me in connection with the subject. I. The occasion and objects of the circulation of Mr. Neill’s “ Extracts,” is a matter of dispute. It had been stated in a Number of the Journal, that some “merit” was considered to be due to c the Editors who had “ instigated,” or, as Mr. Neill does not like the word, let us say promoted, an inquiry into the disease which afflicted the Wernerian Society, and seemed to rankle at its heart’s core. Mr. Neill, however, says “there seems a wish to scatter ‘firebrands and arrows’ ” in the Society, and declares that “ the native tendency” of the article on this subject is to “ instigate the Members of the Wernerian Society to discord and mutual distrust.”—P. 11. But if—permit one moment’s digression—if, to inquire into the state of the Society’s affairs, and to correct abuses, should cause “ discord” and “ mutual distrust,” it surely cannot be the fault of those who promote the inquiry, but shows that there is something wrong in the system; and that very proof of the system being faulty, also points out the neces- sity of an examination. Mr. Neill has also given himself extraordinary trouble to disprove the “ erroneous notions,” which were in circulation, that the attention we had drawn to the state of the Society had any influence over the nomination of a committee of investigation ; and thence sprang, as I believe, his “ Extracts,” upon which we animadverted in the tenth number of the Journal; and, 2d, his ‘‘ Address,” with which I am now engaged. Mr. Neill repeats more than once, in the “Address,” that the present investigation was “ begun in 1824, and all but completed in December 1827;” and yet, in May 1830, the gentleman, who has been for twenty-three years Secretary to the Wernerian Society, declares, with tears in his eyes, that one member (of the Society) believed that no list of the books had ever been made up ; another, that the books had never been delivered over to the Librarian; and he himself, with the most superior means of information, is obliged to print some ‘MS. extracts,” to enlighten the members who were “ so much in the dark.” And when the paper of “ Extracts” makes its appearance, what does it contain ? Neither a list of the “ Books,” be they few or many, nor a catalogue of the “ Donations,” be they worthy of the name of a Museum or not; but merely a statement of the acts of the Society, showing (even if we allowed Mr. Neill’s argument that the present committee is a continuation of the old one,) that the Members of the Society have been attempting for more than five years to obtain information respecting their property, of which they appear still to be in ignorance. But the true statement is, that an inquiry similar to the one which is now in prosecution, had been attempted in 1824, and repeated in 1827; but had on both occasions failed: and that this year a new committee has been formed out of the council, composed, in part, of different individuals, and with restricted objects; for, whereas in the former struggle, the Council directed “ that the state of the objects of natural history presented to the Society be inquired into, immediately after the books shall have been arranged,” in the appointment of the present Committee all written mention of the collection was avoided, and when a Member rose in the Society and attempted to have it included in the duties of the Committee, the President contrived to prevent it, by one of his characteristic suggestions of the propriety of delay. In analyzing Mr. Neill’s circular of “ Extracts,” I came to the conclusion that it “ had been put forth for the mere apparent purpose of depriving us of the credit of having occasioned the renewal of the investigation;” and this he now admits to have been one reason, though he previously attempted to escape the allowance, in conversation with me, by saying that he “had never seen” the Journal. We now, however, arrive at several reasons why the “Extracts” were printed, Because, as before-mentioned, it was “ believed by one Member (of the Wernerian Society) that no list of the books had ever been made up.” 2d, Because Mr. Neill heard “ another assign as the reason, that the books had never been delivered over to the Librarian.”— Because, as Mr. Neill mentioned to me, “ the Librarian had permitted this statement to be made, in his presence, without contradiction and, 4th, Because the “ young Editors” had “ arrogated to themselves and their work, merit relative to the inquiry.”— If I were confident that there is no mistake in the statement, so frequently repeated in the “ Address,” that Mr. Neill “ had never seen” the work, which contained the notice of the present state of the Wernerian Society, there might be some occasion,—in spite of Mr. Neill’s admission that he had read extracts from it in the Observer newspaper, or of any oral information he might have received,—for my withdrawing the opinion I have expressed, that his “Extracts” were circulated as much for the purpose of denying our agency in the promotion of the present inquiry, as with the view to mitigate the severity of the investigation by the Committee. But on this subject I have always doubted, and from the following circumstance my mind still wavers. The reader of Mr. Neill’s pamphlet will observe, that he states that, at the latter end of May last, he “had never seen the periodical work of Messrs. Ainsworth and Cheek”—(P. 3.) And again, “I had not seen Mr. Cheek’s work,” (meaning, I suppose, the same Journal;) “ it had scarcely ever occurred to my thoughts,” Any one may conceive how, when this point-blank assertion first met my eye, the mortified pride of the editor struggled with pity for a gentleman, who unites so many scientific offices in himself, when he could openly declare that he had never seen a work, which he knew to have the character of being tolerably active in giving the earliest information on the subjects with which he is connected, and which was the more likely to interest him, that it appeared in his own city. But there was something so unnatural in the idea, and so utterly inconsistent with the notion I had formed of what a man of science, and especially of what a secretary of a scientific society, ought to be, that I felt it possible that there might be some mistake in the construction which I had put upon the thrice-repeated statement, and I held myself excused in instituting some inquiries, for the purpose of elucidating so strange a declaration. I accordingly wrote to the confidential clerk of Mr. Lizars, our publisher, to know whether he could give me any information on the subject, and I received from him in reply the subjoined letter, which, though it may perhaps tend to throw some light upon the difficulty, I confess my inability to ally precisely with the above-quoted assertions. But, however business-like and circumstantial this letter may appear, it certainly proves nothing more than that on the 13th February last, rather more than three months prior to the time at Which Mr. Neill states, he had never seen the periodical work of Messrs. Ainsworth and Cheek,” he entered the shop of Mr.Lizars, and with open mouth, (but whether with open eyes your deponent sayeth not,) he asked for the 5th No. of this work, in which he had been informed there was a particular article, misconstrued into “an attack upon the Wernerian Society,” and which it is easy to conceive would draw down the indignation of the worthy secretary ; 2dly, that he bought it at the reduced price of eighteen-pence, perhaps because there was only one article in the number which attracted his attention; and Zdly, that he appears to have been more regular of late in paying his devoirs at the shop of our publisher. But, that Mr. Neill ever saw the work in question, prior to the end of May, the letter does not state, and no one, after the perusal of his asseverations, can for one moment suppose it; though he must have possessed a remarkable share of self-denial, not to take a sly peep at the article he sought for, when he had the naughty book in his pocket! II. So much for the reasons which induced Mr. Neill to print his ‘‘Extracts.” Now, as to the nature of the document, its privacy, or publicity ; for Mr. Neill abuses me, for publishing what he calls his “ private document.” Of this I have only two things to say, 1thly, that if it were a “ private,” and, con- sequently, an underhand trick of Mr. Neill, or his client, to lull the vigilance of the Committee, by making them believe that all was going on rightly, it was a most unworthy doing. Justly did Mr. Arnott blame Mr. Neill for not sending a copy. If that had been done, the transaction would have assumed a character of openness and fairness, whatever might have been the opinion of the accuracy of the statements. But this was not the object. The poison was only prepared for those whose activity was dangerous, and its efficacy depended on its concentration. But, 2dly, I confess that I do not even yet clearly see the distinction between printing and publishing, unless the word “ private," or its synonyme, be placed on the face of the printed document. I do not mean to say that mr. Neill’s little paper was put into the hands of a bookseller, or entered at Stationers’ Hall; but if the essence of publication is exemplified in the circulation, amongst a certain number of persons, of historical statements connected with the officers of a public institution, indubitably Mr. Neill’s “Extracts” were published. He might as well say that his “Address” is not published: yet the nature of its circulation differs only from that of the “Extracts,” in the greater number of individuals to whom it was sent. But if a man, who would “ brain himself with a lady’s fan,” can circulate abuse on the victim of his spleen, and afterwards defend himself on the plea of not having published his slander, the printing-office may teem with “ Addresses,” where “private” licence can be indulged in at so cheap a rate. And further, even if Mr. Neill wished his printed “ Extracts” to be considered “private,” and not to be jmblished, he must allow that my offence was somewhat venial, inasmuch as I labour under a considerable disadvantage with respect to him, in the discrimination of these terms, which are somewhat foreign to my profession. III. After a careful examination of Mr. Neill’s circular, I came to the conclusion, as stated in the Journal, (p. 270,) that “almost every paragraph which is not actually an extract, is either a misrepresentation, or a true representation of a censurable fact.” Mr. Neill says, this remark is sweeping and audacious.” Let us then “ particularize,” and “ exemplify.” The misrepresentations are as follows:— 1. Mr. Neill, in his “Extracts,” states that “Mr. Arnott having gone to the Continent, the Committee (for investigating into the state of the Library, in 1824) delayed to report.” But I mentioned in the Journal, on the authority of Dr. Knox, a member of the Committee, that they did not delay in consequence of mr. Arnott’s absence, but, amongst other reasons, because “ the Committee were not permitted to enter the room where the books were said to be kept.” Mr. Neill, on the other hand, in his “ Address,” declares that “this allegation is utterly groundless” though he admits that this room was not “ at all times” accessible to the members, and that (on this account, I presume) a separate apartment is “an accommodation perhaps now indispensable.” Mr. Neill further attempts to throw the blame of the delay on the Committee, who, he says, “were rather remiss,” (p. 2.;) and he particularly points out Dr. Knox. As I had no other means of authenticating the statement which I had made, than by applying to the gentleman on whose authority it rested, and whose name was originally given in support of the remark, I have written to Dr. Knox, and he has favoured me with the reply, which is printed in the Appendix to this Answer, and which will be found to be corroborant, in an important degree, of several other things upon which I dilate. To this letter I refer, in support of this first charge of “misrepresentation.” 2. It was stated in the Journal, that this was a mere equivocation, because “no members required the books for, indeed, no one knew what books there were. I further requested that the book might be shown, in which the receipts for volumes borrowed by members from the Society, were entered; but the Secretary takes care to make no mention of this test. 3. I declared the statement respecting the signature of Mr. Arnott’s name, to be a “misrepresentation.” But in this I was mistaken; and had made amends for my error, before the circulation of Mr. Neill’s “Address.” 4. And lastly, I mentioned that the Rev. Dr. Ritchie did not move “ resolutions,” as stated in the “ Extracts but, that the President having overruled a motion for a special Committee, Dr. Ritchie moved as “ an amendment,” “that the Council be directed to examine into the state of the Library which was afterwards agreed to, by the original motion being withdrawn. The “misrepresentation” here consisted in a mere lapse of form, which I mentioned rather to show the loose nature of the system, than for any other purpose. And this the Secretary admits ; for he says that though he holds “the record as accurate,” from its not having been disputed when read at tlie succeeding meeting, the proceedings may not have been taken down with a “scrupulous adlierence to form.” Such are the “misrepresentations,” which were charged upon the circular of “ Extracts.” There are only two more statements in the paper, which are not actually extracts from the minute-book; and these two, I still believe I was justified in terming “ censurable facts.” 1. It is stated in the 5th paragraph of the “Extracts,” that “ Mr. Macgillivray had hitherto assisted in arranging and keeping the books, without holding any office in the Society.” On this declaration, it was remarked in the Journal, “We need say no more, in explanation of this most unwarrantable assumption, than that Mr. Macgillivray was the private secretary of Professor Jameson, the president of the Society, and that it shows plainly enough, who had the use of the books.” And if. Mr. Neill’s statement had been exact, would this not have been “ a censurable fact ?” But, though I have since discovered that Mr. Macgillivray was appointed assistant librarian so far back as Dec. 1823, I have not to refer to Mr. Neill’s “Extracts” for my knowledge of the fact. 2. Finally, the Journal relates the following amusing anecdote, and this completes the list of “misrepresentations” and “censurable facts” The 8th and concluding paragraph states that ‘the Council met on the 1st May,’ and ‘ appointed a committee for the purposes mentioned in the minutes of the meeting of 24th April, viz. Professor Jameson, Mr. Falconar, Dr. Gillies, Mr. Arnott, with Mr. Wilson, librarian; Professor Jameson, convener. But who had the indelicacy to name the president convener, when it was well known that against him, the inquiry was, in point of fact, directed. He named himself though another gentleman was proposed.” IV. We come now to a more interesting, because a less private and personal, portion of Mr. Neill’s pamphlet, viz. the facts connected with the Library and Museum of the Wernerian Society; and surely it must have been a severe struggle for the Secretary’s contending feelings, when he had to declare in print, (although this be a very different thing from publishing,) that the “Library” of the Wernerian Society is merely the term which they sometimes apply to the few books belonging to the Society and that their “Museum” was nothing but a “ridiculous”. Mr. Neill, who does not wish “to blink any thing,” adds considerably to the value of his pamphlet by putting in print, I believe for the first time, the laws relating to “donations” to the Society. “ Oh! that mine adversary had written a book,” saith the Prophet; and, truly, in being the unintentional cause of the publication of the Secretary’s “ Address,” I consider that more has been done for exposing the misdirection of the Wernerian Society, than all the labours of the Journal could have otherwise effected. From Mr. Neill’s  “Address” it appears, that “ manuscript communications, or books, presented to the Society,” are, by an express law, made “their private property” but that the same law contains a “ stipulation” with Professor Jameson. This would certainly, in some degree, alleviate the charge, that the Society has been palpably tricked out of any right of property in the donations, which have been presented to it for the purpose of establishing a rallying point and bond of connection amongst the Blembers, by the formation of a private museum,—if it were clear that they have access at pleasure to the room where these donations are deposited. But I have reason to know, that if any Member of the Wernerian Society apply at the door of the University museum, for admittance in virtue of his membership, he will be submitted to the insult of a refusal from the Professor’s porter. Indeed Mr. Neill himself admits the fact, though in more covert terms, when he states that “ difficulty has doubtless occurred in regard to the fulfilment of the stipulation in the second clause of the first section, viz. that the Members of the Society  The reader of the “Address,” will observe that I have here taken the opportunity to make use of a corrigendum, which Mr. Neill has done me the favour to transmit to me. I retain a right of inspecting the donations to the Society at proper times. But though I see clearly the difficulty of the case, the President might surely invent some ingenious method of admitting the members without a fee, from the resources of the same intellect, which has contrived to secure the enjoyment of any advantages that may arise, from the first clause of the law. The fact, when reduced to the mostiextreme simplicity, is, that the Members of the Wernerian Society are at the same time deprived of a property in the donations which are presented to them, and of the power of inspecting them, wherever they may be deposited. A collection of British Shells; from the late Captain Laskey.  A collection of Insects, from Mr. Wilkins and Mr. Spence of Hull. A collection of the Filices of Tristan d’Acunha, from the late Captain Carmichael. A stuffed Ornithorynchus, from the late Dr. Wright. The cranium of a Barbarossa, from Dr; Wright. Rock Specimens, illustrative of his excellent geognostical papers on different districts of Scotland, from the Rev. Dr. Macknight. Alas, poor Fred ! (for I presume this must be the noble skull,) little didst thou dream, during thy earthly career, that our University Museum would be thy gaudy tomb! Little didst thou think, even at the period of thy greatest debasement,—when thou wert obliged to hold the stirrup of the Pope, and lead the holy father’s palfrey,—that thy head would ultimately be an item in the list of gewgaws shown to the vulgar at a price! But is this really the cranium of Frederick Barbarossa ? If I recollect aright, he died in Silicia, from bathing, when overheated, in that very river which, from the same cause, had so nearly proved fatal to Alexander the Great. But my researches have not led me to the discovery of the place where his bones were deposited : nor can I learn upon what authority Dr. Wright has stated this to be his skull. Indeed, I should be very much inclined to doubt its authenticity, if it had not been given in print by the Secretary of the Wernerian Society. I do not think that the phrenologists know any thing about it; and, in this city, I would almost take that fact as sufficient evidence against it. That it is not the skull either of the famous corsair-brothers, I take to be beyond dispute; or it could not possibly have lain so long in secret. What an odious service has the Secretary brought upon himself, thus to sacrifice the fair fame of the Wernerian Society on the altar of the respectability of his idol, the President! But far be it from me to interfere with his worshipping. I cannot but admire the friendly devotion. However, without using the pointed language employed in Dr. Knox’s letter, on the subject of this list, and without wishing to overrate the collection of the Wernerian Society, which, like all others, must have its beginning, and which may have been unfairly retarded, I am able to add the following few donations from my own knowledge, which must, however, be very inferior to that of the Secretary of the Society:— The cranium of a Babyroussa, from the late Dr. Wright. A collection of Rocks of the Coal Formation of Alloa, from R. Bald, Esq. A collection of Rocks of the Island of Papa Stour, from the Rev. Dr. Fleming. A series of Rocks illustrating the Geognosy of Arran, from Professor Jameson. The bones of the Orkney Animal, from Gilbert hleason. Esq. And Dr. Knox mentions in his letter— “A specimen of a Pelican, from Mr. Neill; and “A Fossil Seal from the marine deposit between Loch Lomond and the Clyde; donor unknown to him and, indeed, I should not be at all surprized, if the investigations of the Committee were to bring to light many other donations. Of the “ Library,” I would merely say, that if Mr. Neill finds it “scarcely possible to wthhold a smile,” when it is sjooken of under that designation, the members of the Society seem to have formed a very different estimate of its value; and that a great deal of unnecessary trouble must have been taken in appointing an assistant librarian in 1823, and again in 1828, to “ relieve Mr, Wilson,” (the librarian) and “facilitate access to the books, and lastly, that the apparent importance attached to the books, in the language of the “ Extracts,” would impress one with a very contrary notion. At p. 20. of the Address, Mr. Neill says I am “pleased broadly to insinuate that the President appropriated to his own use the books belonging to the Wernerian Society and he attempts to ridicule the idea. But notwithstanding all that Mr. Neill has said, in praise of his “ distinguished,” ‘‘illustrious,” and “ valued” superior, I confess myself to be fully persuaded of the truth of the “contemptible and ludicrous idea,” which he says was “ pardonable only in some raw lad in his first session at a debating club !” And I believe that the possession of books, and the facility for gratifying the most inordinate passion for books, does not take away, but actually increases, the desire for grasping at even a few volumes more, particularly when these volumes have the charm of novelty. But I am far from asserting, that Professor Jameson does make any improper use of his opportunities, although he may do so for any thing his advocate, Mr. Neill, has said to disprove it. Mr. Neill allows, in his “ Address,” that the whole of the select, and I have reason to believe, valuable collection of books, belonging to the Wernerian Society, is deposited in the Professor’s private room, which Mr. Neill himself declares that “no member of the Wernerian Society could ever for a moment entertain a thought of claiming.” Does this not amount to conferring upon the President of the Society the exclusive privileges of the Library. Moreover, even the Librarian cannot enter the room, by right of office, to give out books, without asking the President’s permission. And at the time of the original statement, he had neither a catalogue of the library, nor the keys of the book-case. In short, the library was not in his possession, nor under his control. V. Another statement of mine which calls forth Mr. Neill’s ire, is, that “it was well known that the President (of the Wernerian Society,) who is the Editor of a scientific journal, was in the constant habit of appropriating to his own use the papers which ought to have formed part of the Transactions.” It is unfortunate for the cause which mr. Neill espouses that he should admit his being so much connected with the President; for the circumstances of his being the “printer of Professor Jameson’s Journal,” and of the Society not having published Transactions for four years, indicate something like siiiking the one for the purpose of exalting the other; and the feet that the President is in the habit of applying the papers of the Society to his own use, is admitted by Mr. Neill in express words. All that I stated was, that the papers read at the Society’s meetings, made their appearance, not in the published Transactions of the Society, where they should have been, but in their “ President’s scientific Journal,”— and this to the manifest deterioration of the Society’s fame. 

But I agree with Mr. Neill, that provided a useful paper be given to the world, it signifies little to science through what channel it circulates; and if it become more widely known through Pro- fessor Jameson’s Journal than through the Wernerian Memoirs, the scientific world is no loser,—the author is no loser, (if, as Mr. Neill would seem to insinuate, he is paid for handing over his manuscripts from the Memoirs” to the “ Journal,”)—pro- bably the Professor is no loser,—and as for the Society, poor thing! if its President and Secretary vote away, or forestall its marketable papers, instead of protecting its interests, who is to advocate its cause } Blr. Neill says that the “ good reason” why the Society has not published Transactions for such a long period, is, “ that it has incurred considerable loss by every publication.” How could it be otherwise, if the best papers which are read before the Society, are sure to be found in the President’s Journal ? Who is to buy a work composed of the refuse papers which would not answer the purpose of the New Philosophical Journal ? 
It must be remembered, that Law VII. Sect. 2. of the Wernerian Code, as quoted by Mr. Neill, enacts, that manuscript communications presented to the Society, do remain their private property ; and yet he confesses that he has been in the habit of voting for their disposal.
When, in a prospectus stitched into the No. of this periodical for July 1830, it is even stated that “in this Journal alone will be found the proceedings of the Wernerian Natural History Society,” the nature of the method here employed assumes a palpable form ; but though I do not blame the editor of the Journal for inaking the name of the Society a saleable article, I think the prospectus-writer would do well to look into other publications, before he makes such assertions. Finally, I need not remind Sir Neill what he told me was expected to be done with the papers read before the Wernerian Society, when I asked him, aome time ago, not without the sanction of its author, to allow me to publish a short notice, which he read at one of the meetf ings, on the naturalization of the Salurtiia luna in Europe. From the foregoing details, then, I presume I have sufficiently proved the truth of my assertion, that the Wernerian Society has been “misdirected and indeed I know not how it could possibly be otherwise, whilst the highest office in the Society,—- of little worth to the Professor of Natural History, from the constancy of its possession,—and affording no source of emu- lation to the talented members of the Society, from being placed beyond their reach,—has been for 23 years a monopoly. I am the more surprized that the Society should have annually kept up this exclusive system, that I am not led to understand that the Professor made any stipulation” for the perpetual office, when the fundamental laws were framed. The Com- mittee of investigation will, however, probably be able to throw some Light upon this question, if they have the power to cause the laws to be printed for circulation amongst the members. In the interim, if I may be excused the liberty, I would suggest to the members of the Society, that the Geographical Society of London has seen the wisdom of providing such a law as the following Resolved, “That the office of President be not held by the same individual for a longer period than two consecutive years, but that he be eligible for re-election after the lapse of one year.” By thus preventing stagnation, corruption would be avoided. Verbum sat! My task is now drawing to a close. There is but one other part of Mr. Neill’s “Address” wliich seems to require my notice ; and this speaks so touchingly and forcibly for itself, that no comment of mine can improve it. It was very innocently asked, in the article on the Wernerian Society, whether the Council had seen it necessary “to go to the expense/however trifling,” of printing the circular of “Extracts.” And here again we touched a tender chord, which vibrates in this measure. Mr. Neill, however, begs the gentlemen not to imagine that he grudges either “the unavoidable loss of petty outlays,’’ incident to his official situation, or his “ long-continued gratuitous services.” Would it not have been more delicate, then, not to have alluded to them, even “in print” ? I have throughout stated that I do not hold mr. Neill to be responsible for what he has done ; nor is he, any more than I was responsible for the error of fact which I repeated as it was told to me. But as soon as I discovered my error, I anxiously sought to retrieve it; and perhaps Mr. Neill might have found it more suitable to the occasion, if, instead of attempting to implicate the members of the Wernerian Society in the support of his fault, he had circulated an “ Address,” soliciting the Society’s pardon for the unwarrantable assumption into which he had been betrayed, (in reliance on the privacy of the transaction,) of circulating a printed document, either representing truly, or misrepresenting, the affairs of the Society, without asking the permission of the Council, or even admitting to them a proof-sheet. Mr. Neill naw declares that the President had authorized the document. Did I not from the beginning express my confident belief that such was the case? The proof-sheet was submitted to the President; and he returned it, (to the Secretary,) “ merely marking in the envelope, that he saw no objection to the extracts.” The fact is thus placed in its true light. If the President had stated to the Secretary, (as he ought to have done,) that lie considered the circulation of the “ Extracts” was uncalled for and improper—would Mr. Neill have committed himself in such a measure ? I now terminate my unpleasant duty. My object is fulfilled. The Wernerian Society is in the progress of regeneration. I have done justice to my regard for Mr. Neill, by disclaiming any unfriendly feeling against him, in spite of his reckless attack upon me,—at the same time that I have shown him, where I might press upon an open sore, if I were so disposed. And I have drawn the eyes of the public upon a gentleman, who, if he had made a different use of his opportunities, might have perpetuated his fame for ages, instead of stripping himself of the honours which he has won in past days, and leaving the world in nakedness. Mr. Neill is very much mistaken in supposing that I feel “ enmity,” or hostility” against the Professor of Natural History. I am only sorry that he who has hitherto done so much service to the Wernerian Society, to the University Museum, and to Mineralogy, should not now see his own interest; and I declare my sentiments plainly and openly. But I would that the respect which all men feel for his past services, were not to be supplanted by regret for the obstructions which he is now placing in the path of science in Edinburgh. Finally, I may inform those of my friends who suppose that I have been acting in concert with other persons, during the recent exposure of the system which obtains in the Wernerian Society and the University Museum, that I am solely responsible for what I have done, having acted on the suggestion of no one; and that if there be fault found with me, I do not feel myself incapacitated for the burden, since I believe I have done, if not what was “ expedient” in regard to myself, at least what was upright and just. And I may further say, that what I have done, I would, and will do again, if occasion require it, so long as my independence can maintain that spirit of disgust by which I am now led to point my finger at a sickly and overgrown monopoly. 

