Suggestions on the relation between organized bodies, and the conditions of their existence 
Every student of natural science must have found the advantage of possessing some leading principles, however hypothetical, under which he may consider the many unconnected facts which daily fall under his observation. The following propositions are suggested as at least capable of , proving serviceable in this respect, at the same time that they may possibly be found, from future development, to be explanatory of several of the phenomena of organization.
Though founded on the comparison of numerous facts, hitherto unexplained, no claim is advanced for these generalizations, except that they are not commonly received, and that they merit some consideration from the philosophical anatomist.
l. The developement of the process of organization, a power imposed by the Deity upon matter depends upon the conditions of existence. 
2. The perfection of organized bodies, or the number and complexity of organs has a direct ratio with the number of the conditions of existence.
Thus the lower the animal or plant in the scale of perfection, the fewer the conditions of its existence, and vice versa. 
3. All organized bodies possess the power of varying the developement of the organs, by addition or subtraction of parts, as changes in the conditions of existence occur. It is easy to conceive that an organized body can assimilate elements in the form of a new organ, as new functions are required, when we recollect that it is constantly exercising a power of converting inorganic matter into the living emblem of its original form. 
4. The characters of organized bodies will be permanent during the continuation of the same conditions of existence which led to their developement, and no longer.
5. The more numerous the conditions of existence, the less liable the characters of the organized body to change and vice versa. 
 6. It has been observed that the older the formations of the earth’s crust, generally speaking, the less perfect the organic remains they contain. This progressive increase in perfection of organization, would lead us to expect, from the foregoing principle, that, with the advancing age of the earth, the conditions have increased in number, and this seems to be the fact. 
7. Adaptation is the law by which organized bodies change with the variation of the conditions of existence ; and separation of the functions of relation, and concentration of the vital functions, seems to be the mode of perfection.
By the “conditions or existence”, we mean the external physical agents with which an organized body is in necessary relation, and upon which the integrity and action of its functions depends.
