The position, that the organization of the higher animals can be reduce to an uniform type, supported by Mr. Geoffroy St. Hillaire, depends on the “theory of analogies,” the “ principal of connexions,”- what the author calls the “elective affinities of the organic elements” and the “ balancing of organs.” 
The ?rst o these principles constitutes the basis of the doctrines of Aristotle, but having to depend, for its existence, rather upon re?ection than demonstration, it was not applied to practical purposes, till regenerated by St. Hilaire, who asserted-that it is not always the organs in their totality, but the materials of which each ‘organ is‘ composed, that may be reduced to identity. Considering that form was fugitive among animals, and therefore not a true ground for analogy, the same zoologist made all his researches bear upon the mutual, necessary, and consequently invariable dependence of parts,-which he named the “ principle of connexions.” The principle by which the materials of organization group together to form an organ, he expressed by the term “ elective a?inity of organic elements ,-" and the law, in virtue of which no normal or pathological organ can acquire an extraordinary development, without another in its system or its relations suffering in the same ratio, is the “ balancing of organs.” It was upon the extension of a lofty philosophy, founded upon mere anatomical considerations, that Geoffroy St. Hilaire established his views (‘of the structure of the organs of respiration, and of the vertebral column, and subsequently traced an unity in the most disorderly and the most anomalous organization, that of monsters. - M. St. Hilaire having given a favourable report to the Academy of Sciences on a memoir of Messrs.  Laurencet and Meyraut,tending to prove, that the organization of the crustacea, and more especially that of the mollusca, offers nothing that is not in harmony with what is presented by the remainder of the animal kingdom, Baron Cuvier took occasion to state that he had not changed his opinion on the manner in which the animals in question should be considered. Admitting the approximation of the mollusca to the vertebrated animals, in number and diversity of parts, he continued to oppose the idea that their organization is composed in the same manner, o arranged according to the same plan. 
On entering more at length on the examination of these views, M. Cuvier, in the first place, exposed the circumstances which led to this discussion, and then stated his objection to the theory of M. St. Hilaire. It appears that two young and ingenious observers, in studying the respective position of the viscera of the Cephalopoda, have thought that he might and between these viscera an arrangement that which occurs among the vertebrated animals, if we represented an eephalopodous molluscum to ourselves as, a, vertebral animal whose trunk had heen ben't back upon itself to the height of the umbilicus, so that the pelvis should come in opposition with the neck. “One of our learned brethren,” said M. Cuvier, “ seizing with enthusiasm this new view, announced that it completely refuted every thing I had said upon the distance which separates the mollusca from the vertebrated animals. Going even much farther than the authors of the memoir, he concluded from it that zoology has, to the present day, had no solid basis,—that it has been an edifice constructed on sand,—and that its only indestructible base will be a principle which he calls the ‘unity of composition.’ 
Cuvier, determined to discuss the reality of this principle, began by examining the question in its particular relation with the mollusca. 
“ But before every thing," said he, “it is necessary, to define the terms clearly, and to determine what we understand by the expressions ‘unity of composition,’ ‘unity of plan.’ If we took the words in their most rigorous acceptation, we could only say that there is unity of composition in two kinds of animals, when they are composed of the same organs; and to prove that there is unity of plan in their organization, it would be required to show that these identical organs are disposed in the same order in both of the animals. “Now, it is impossible to suppose that the naturalists who speak of unity of composition and of unity of plan, in the whole animal in the same manner or that they wished to assert that all animals are composed of the same organs, arranged in the same manner. 
“The terms thus defined, the principal of unity, restrained as it ought to be, appears an incontestable truth, but is far from being new. It forms, on the contrary, one of the bases upon which zoology has reposed from its 0rigin,—one of the principles upon which Aristotle, its creator, founded it,-—a basis upon which zoologists, worthy of that name, have sought to enlarge, and to the establishment of which all the efforts of anatomy have been directed.
When he proved that the os quadrates in birds, is analogous to the tympanum in the foetus of mammiferae, he made real and important discoveries, to which I have been the first to do justice in the report which I gave of them to the 'Academy. There are, further, features which he has added to the different degrees of resemblance which exist between the composition of different animals ; but he has only added to the ancient and well known bases of zoology, he has not changed them in the least.  
Thus all naturalists knew, for a long time, that the cetacea have on the side of the anus two little bones called the rudiments of the pelvis. There is then, in this case, and it has been known for centuries, a slight resemblance of composition , but nothing can make us believe that there is unity of composition, when this ves of a pelvis gives support to none of the bones of the lower extremities.
“In one word, if by unity of composition they mean identity, they say a thing contrary to the testimony of the senses.
“If by it they mean resemblance, analogy, they say a thing that is true in certain limits, but as old in its principle as zoology itself, and to which the most recent discoveries have only added, in certain cases, more or less important features, without altering anything in its nature." 
Further, in this important and ancient principle, Mr. Cuvier, and it is more particularly herein that he differs from the naturalists whose opinion he combats, is far from considering it as a single principle ; on the contrary, he only sees a principle subordinate to one more elevated and much more fruitful —the conditions of existence, the conformity of parts,and their coordination for the place which the animal is to fill in nature. Such, he considers, is the true philosophical principle from which the possibility of certain resemblances may flow, and the impossibility of others.  Such is the rational principle whence that of analogy, of plan, and of composition, is deduced, and in which, at the same time, it meets limits which we vainly attempt to overlook. "The reality of a certain analogy of composition and of plan being known, naturalists have nothing else to do, and they in fact do nothing else, than examine how far the resemblance may extend, in what cases, and on what points it rests, and if there are beings where it is so far reduced as to be said to be absent. It is the special object of comparative anatomy, which is far from a modern science, since its first author was Aristotle. Mr., Cuvier entered into the details of the discussion in the point of view announced by Messrs. Laurencet and Me rant, wherein the mollusca are considered as species of vertebrate animals, bent backwards at the umbilicus, so that the two portions of the spine of the back come in contact. To appreciate the justice of this view, Mr Cuvier took, ‘on the one hand, a vertebrate animal, in which bent, as was required, the pelvis towards the back part of the neck, and lifted away the integuments of one side, to expose the internal parts in that situation. On the other band, he took a ‘cattle-fish’,placed it by the side of the vertebrated  animal, and examined the relative situation of the prts.
“ Passing successively in review the respective position of the head and of the different parts which it contains, the larger vessels, and the organs of generation, the author concluded, from a very detailed comparative examination, that the analogy which the authors of the memoir thought that they had observed, is every where illusory. He thought that it would even be easier to establish some analogy of situation, by supposing the animal to be bent in the opposite direction to the hpothesis; then, indeed, the brain, liver, oesophagus, stomachs, and the great artery, would remain in the same respective position as in vertebral animals,- but the hearts;  vein, branchiae, and organs of generation, would always be differently disposed, and the problem would not be resolved. How, I ask,” said Cuvier, after having demonstrated the striking differences which were apparent in the structure of these animals, “ how can any one, after seeing these numerous and important distinctions between the cephalopoda and the vertebrata, say that there is an identity, a unity of composition, without perverting the terms of language from their most manifest sense! l shall reduce the facts to their true expression, when I state that the cephalopoda have many organs which are common to them and the vertebrata and which perform similar functions in each-though these organs are differently disposed, and often constructed in a different manner in the two classes ,—that they are accompanied by many other organs which the vertebrate animals do not possesss; — whilst the latter have also many organs which are not found in the oephalopodaf? 
 Such are the opinions of M. Cuvier on this important question in philosophical anatomy. His objections have, however, been met by St. Hilaire, whose answer we shall give in our next number and then compare the results of a controversy which has arisen between the two first zoologists of the age. 

