

The map which is appended to the present number represents geologically and geographically the coast line of the district, a portion of which is, in these illustrations, submitted to examination. It is taken from the Ordnance survey, with such observations added as appear necessary to make it useful in this investigation, and with the succession of the formations marked out by division lines, so as to serve generally for this and the preceding papers. 

The portion now to be considered is that which is comprehended between the points A and B in the map, from the extremity of the chalk cliffs at Old Harry, to the commencement of the sand hills between Studland and Little Sea. 

The extremity of these cliffs has already been figured, in the diagram No. 39, vol. i., p. 418 ; and the continuation of them to their junction with the plastic clay at the point C on the map, is given in the following figure, (45). 

Chalk Cliffs from Old Harry to the Plastic Clay. South side of Studland Bay 

The chalk is, as before mentioned, through a great part of the space, nearly horizontal ; but it has a gentle dip to the north-west, which increases as it approaches the plastic clay, near which it has suffered local derangements. The cliffs are of a medium softness, but are easily separated into quad- 
rangular or trapezoidal blocks, and, where horizontally bedded, are fissured by vertical cracks from top to bottom. They are also spotted, like the Suffolk chalk, with manganese, and contain much yellow matter, probably decomposed pyrites. It is by the instrumentality of these cracks, that the perpendicular buttresses before spoken of occur on either side of the promontory at Old Harry (vol. ii. p. 131) ; and thus the cliffs on the south side of Studland Bay, have been separated into divisions by the action of the sea. As there is nothing material between Old Harry Point and the division nearest to the plastic clay, I have introduced the profile from the point E of fig. 45, as a sufficient illustration of the whole of the phenomena. 
It will be seen by the examination of that diagram (fig. 46), that the measure of the decay of the cliffs is, to a certain degree, regulated by these vertical fissures : the line C c in fig. 46 shows this very clearly, for it is impossible that the protruding and bulging central part of the buttress can resist the elements long after the sea shall have a little further undermined the base. The changes, therefore, in the outline of these cliffs, cannot be exactly uniform, but must be produced by different measures of decay ; and it also follows, that that decay must be of a more rapid character than if there were no 
assistance offered by these natural rents. 

These vertical fissures are curious also in a more important geological sense. It is observed that they occur only where the chalk strata are horizontal, or nearly so ; and that the fissures which traverse the vertical beds are at right angles, or nearly perpendicular, to the direction of the fault which occurs at Ballard Head, (vol. i. p. 467). Now this, upon the supposition I have advanced before, should be exactly the case; and, therefore, these vertical rents are nothing but joints, traversing the whole solid body of chalk, consequent upon the strain of elevation. There are two other evidences of this fact. At the approach of the chalk to the plastic clay, at the bottom of Studland Bay, represented at I and J in the diagram (fig, 47), which gives the plan of the cliffs from the point E in the map, and in figs. 45 and 46 looking westward, faults are very numerous ; and in several cases there is the plainest proof that the masses have been ground against each other, as the surface of the chalk is sometimes ground smooth, and is shining, as if covered with slickensides ; in other instances, the surface at the fault is covered with a thin coating of yellowish iron, which is striated by scratches exactly after the manner of the surfaces of faults in the older rocks. The flints in the vicinity of these faults are all fractured in situ, by cracks which have traversed them as well as the chalk ; and the beds of chalk are compressed into extremely thin lamina, the edges being turned up against the portions that yet retain their horizontality of position, as if, after the upheaving, they had again fallen back, which was also the case, as I endeavoured to show, in the Ballard Head fault. At I, in fig. 47, the situation of three faults is shown. The first is indicated by a vertical crack down the cliff', on each side of which the beds of flint are curved, first dipping to the fault, and then rising in a curvilinear course at a higher elevation, as shown in figure 48. A few paces to the eastward the thick blocks of chalk are succeeded by a mass of about two feet wide, consisting of lamina from \ to ^ an inch thick, gradually passing into larger blocks as before, but dipping 11° to N.W. : ten paces further a similar laminated mass, dipping to the S.E. occurs, so as to mark the eastern limit of the deranged mass. The beds are here all strongly marked by yellow seams, and the fault and strata divisions are coated with yellow matter, — the flints are also much displaced and shattered. But the most extraordinary appearance is, that the thinly laminated bed appears to mark an internal derangement in the cliff", for about six feet from the first fault, the face of the cliff is protected by a continuation of larger beds and blocks, through an opening in which the smaller lamina are seen, and, on inspection, this face is separated from the portion behind by a line of fissure which slopes in a slanting direction into the interior of the promontory. This is shown in fig. 48. 

There is a difficulty in comprehending the exact character of these derangements ; but after considerable observation, I am inclined to think that these faults are occasioned by the action of a protruding mass of the lower chalk, pushed up in an arch-like form from below ; — and that they betoken the localities of the up-heaving process : it seems impossible to account for the curvature, compression, and fractured state of the beds in the middle of a cliff, in any other way. Moreover, the vertical and diagonal joints which exist in the horizontal beds, are here made to correspond with the altered condition of those beds. The vertical joints become diagonal in the sloping beds, being still at right angles to the strata, and the diagonal joints appear to pass into lines of stratification, which is consonant to theory if we assume, as before explained, that the diagonal joints were the result of that force which produced the Ballard Head fault, and are parallels to it. And if this reasoning be correct, we see that the derangements exhibited on the Ballard Head side of the promontory are also traceable all through, and consequently, that the derangements in the plastic clay beds are attributable to the same causes. For the joints also that traverse the beds of the 
plastic clay at the Red Rock, soon to be mentioned, which dip at about 24° to the northward, are transverse to their direction ; furnishing proof of the universality of the forces that have operated on the whole of the district, and which are clearly connected with elevation from below. 

The lines at F, G, H, &c. to N, (fig. 47), represent the vertical rents, many of which occur in the short distance of 760 paces, x the whole length from E to the end of the chalk. — The beach all the way is strewn with masses of chalk and flints, and plastic clay sand-rock, fallen from the cliffs ; but it is not wide, and there is no evidence whatever in this part, of any ancient elevated beach. 

Towards the point N (fig. 47), the cliff' of chalk becomes much lower, and is covered with a thick capping of plastic clay beds, consisting above of white and yellow sand, and below of a brown conglomerate with clay, abounding at the junction in springs, which have brought down vast masses, forming a sort of undercliff , and strewing the shore with fragments. 
The conglomerate is composed of clay, fractured flints, green plastic clay, pebbles, and iron stone, the curvilinear direction of which is deserving of notice. It is seen in fig. 47 that the chalk, at its extremity, is worn into cavities, which are filled with conglomerate. The portions of chalk are yellow, curved, and fractured, and, corresponding to them, the lowest beds of plastic clay, which consists, in its upper member, of a black sand, and in its lower, of a hard iron stone containing hollows filled with crystals of iron, — is arched over the chalk and broken, evidently proving that the chalk has been pushed up so as to protrude through the super-incumbent deposits, which fill up the intervals between the domes of chalk, and dip vertically between them, as they ought to do in the supposition of a regular arch thus formed. The iron stone being the hardest, and the chalk being acted upon by destructive agents, in one instance the former remains a perfect arch, the chalk being removed. Now in these domes of chalk, that rock is fractured and split, together with its imbedded flints, as it is a little to the westward. In all these cases of derangement, it is remarkable that the chalk is of a yellowish hue, which Mr. Lyell conceives to be the result of the iron in the super-incumbent beds ; but such can hardly be £he case, when it is observed that these yellow lines are not external markings, but a portion of the solid matter itself. The chalk here is evidently composed of alternations of yellow and white layers, and in many cases most beautiful fragments may be found, in which the layers are concentric, the nucleus being a white nodule, and the yellow lines curving round, like the similar wood-like markings in the Red Rock of the plastic clay, (fig. 49). The strata are also distinguished by yellow partings, and often on the surface there are innumerable minute black spots, together with elegantly branching dendrites, the latter seeming to result from the pressure of the colouring liquid in the squeezing of the beds. This liquid seems to have been manganese in solution. What connection there may actually have been between the derangements in the beds and these metallic markings, is foreign to our subject ; but the white beds of chalk are undisturbed, and the yellow fractured concentric curves of yellow chalk and curved : and the change of colour round a nucleus of white. Natu-^ ft sufficient indication of the localities of disturbance. 



Another point to be remarked is, that fossils are very rare in this chalk ; here and there a Belemnite and a Terebratula signify their existence, but although the flints abound in large nodules, there are scarcely any shells. 

The continuation of the chalk from this point is no longer traceable, save by the plants that occur along the shore and the recess at the junction of the two lines of cliff; but between the shore and the hill of Ballard Down, the conformation of the ground shows that the chalk extends under a thin superficial covering, from behind Studland to the edge of the ascent on the road to Swanage, where the steepness of the slope and the sudden and abrupt stages of ascent, and the broken character of the fragments of chalk and flint, the latter of which cover the summit, sufficiently point out the spot where the vertical chalk is to be found, though the surface is clothed with a thin vegetation of grass and furze bushes, affording a scanty herbage for sheep, and a bed for myriads of Helices. 

He also adduces Dr. Mantell as pointing out a similar breccia, containing green pebbles, at Seaforth ; and also quotes them as occurring in the North of Hampshire and at Croydon. 

Now this breccia or conglomerate consists of sandy loam and brown clay, with yellow clay, and greenish clay and sand, containing, not only flints from the chalk, but the pebbles themselves ; and, as it appears to me, has resulted from the breaking up of the regularly-deposited lowest plastic clay bed, and the mixture of flints with it, from a portion of the cliffs higher than those in which the conglomerate occurs. That lowest bed is, I conceive, the pebble bed itself, which, in various parts of this county, as at Lulworth, Hinton Martell, and Booker's Hill, near Lytchett, occurs in great force immediately over the chalk. It "may also be seen, not only at Croydon, but in a vast accumulation at Otterton Hill near Winchester, at Lewisham in Kent, and at Farnborough, where it lies upon the chalk ; as it may be also seen at the chalkpit near Shelley Church, and at Bramford, in the county of 
Suffolk. In all these localities I have noticed the occurrence of pebbles directly, or very nearly so, over the chalk, sometimes imbedded in green, and sometimes in other coloured sands and marls. These pebbles are also frequent in the surface drift of Dorsetshire, pointing out the former greater extent of their occurrence ; and, singular enough, at the descent to the village of Etterbeek from the city of Brussells, and also at Tervureen, in the Forest of Soignies, I have found pebbles perfectly similar in every respect, in the former case occupying a position in the midst of the beds which are called 'calcaire grossier,' and are assumed to be the equivalent of the London clay.  I mention these localities, because I think that the origin of these pebble-beds, and their particular position in the supra-cretaceous deposits, have not received all the attention which they deserve. An observation upon the subject will not be out of place here. 

These pebbles invariably occur either in the lower beds of the plastic clay, or as imbedded in the pudding-stone of Hertford and Dorsetshire, or as in loose aggregations of superficial drift. In both the latter cases, their original position as pebbles was doubtless that of the former. Now it is the opinion of several eminent geologists, that the plastic clay beds have been derived in great measure from the destruction, at a very early period, of the lower green sand formation, which is the expressed idea of Professor Phillips, for instance. And in considering the origin of these pebbles, I have been led to believe, that though they are called flint (Blackheath flint), they are not flint but chert, and derived from the chert beds of the green sand. Dr. Mitchell (' Mag. Nat. Hist' vol. ii. p. 218) has very carefully described the true character of these " peculiar flints," as they occur in the neighbourhood of London, and I am sure, after that elaborate detail on the subject, no doubt can remain, that they are not flint, but chert pebbles. There is nothing extraordinary in admitting such an origin ; — it cannot be the " countless multitudes" and " millions" of them which startle the mind ; — for it is a fact, that nearly all the drift gravel in that part of Dorsetshire of which I am treating, is composed of chert, which I have traced to the green sand of Devonshire : so that even in modern times, compared with the plastic clay era, the chert beds of the green sand have furnished the materials for innumerable beds of pebbles, of much greater extent than those composing the Blackheath and Croydon deposits. Analogous to the supposition thus mentioned, is Dr. Mitchell's remark that "there is a spot beyond the boundaries " of his paper, " where such flints are exceedingly abundant, which is the hill immediately above the fire-stone quarries, a mile north from Godstone Green"— (p. 219) Now the firesi one is the lower green sand, and at Godstone the pits occur in the side of the chalk escarpment of Tillingdown, having opposite to them, at little more than two miles distance to the south, the elevated ridge of Tilbuster Hill, which consists of chert, and the summit of which is nearly on a level with the chalk downs. 

The subjoined section (P) is given to point out the peculiar position of the chert beds, | which are, in some places, perfectly fragmentary, so near to the locality where the pebbles are found ; and which I cannot help thinking supplied them. Should further examination lead to the conviction, that the pebbles above the firetone did come from Tilbuster, or the beds to which that hill belongs, there is no reason to deny, that the chert of Surrey was once perfectly sufficient in extent to have supplied all the beds of transported rolled fragments that form the accumulations at Croydon, Blackheath, &c. 

Having suggested the above possible origin for the pebbles of the early tertiary epoch, it remains to say a word as to the method of their accumulation. This strikes me to have been occasioned by the very same causes that now produce shingle-banks and beaches on and near the shores of our present seas, — currents and agitations of the tidal waters, whether of the ocean or its estuaries. That this is probable is shown by the fact, that these pebbles are not universally scattered over the surface of the chalk, but only on such places (where found in situ) as at once justify the idea of an ancient littoral accumulation. Take the case of Farnborough for instance (fig. R). 

The pebbles are there found over the chalk, just at its outcrop from under the tertiary beds that extend thence to London. And it will be found, in the generality of cases, that the accumulation has taken place, not at a distance from what must have been the shore of the tertiary sea, but on the very limits of its margin, as defined by the rise of the sloping chalk from under the horizontal layers of the tertiary beds. 

Now, in the case of Studland, the conglomerate with pebbles is found exactly at the edge of the basin in the slope of the lofty chalk range of Ballard Down, just where the plastic clay series commences ; so is it at Lulworth, for it is at the foot of the Purbeck downs that the pebbles make their appearance. But I am bound to admit, that two lines of these pebbles, regularly imbedded, occur in the sand at Booker's Hill, Lytchett, at a much higher level above the present sea, than that at Studland, — and the difference of elevation is probably 200 or 300 feet ; of which a similar example is afforded 
at Hinton Martell, where the pebble-bed is found on the summit of a high chalk ridge, whilst the lower lands, also covering the chalk, have traces of these pebbles. 

Here there seems a discrepancy, for if these pebbles mark an ancient littoral accumulation, the tertiary sea must have stood, in different places of the same geological area, at different elevations ! But to explain this impossibility we have two solutions at hand. The plastic clay series in south-east Dorset, has experienced enormous dislocation and denudation ; and it is not only probable, but proveable, that there have been depressions and elevations throughout this area. — 
Moreover, evidence will be advanced in the course of these illustrations, to show that during the deposition of the plastic clay beds, violent denuding and destructive agencies were at work, and that the first-deposited beds were in some cases, as at Wareham, and near the station-house, Studland, broken up to form the constituent portions of a later part of the deposit. 
So that the ancient shingle of the plastic clay may have been removed and re-accumulated upon other spots, which were then emerging from the general low level to a higher one, ununder the influence of those up-lifting agencies which we have reason to conclude accompanied the desolating torrents that have passed over, and excavated and broken up, the first deposited beds. 

At Studland, where this conglomerate occurs, also is seen one of the most remarkable proofs of the occurrence of uplifting forces after the deposit of the plastic clay ; and this we shall presently consider. But generally speaking, where the chalk and super-incumbent deposits have not been shattered and up-heaved, the pebbles in question occur at the outcrop of the chalk, on the slope of the tertiary basin, and extend only so far into the interior of the deposits now filling that basin, as is compatible with the belief that they represent what they once were, namely, a littoral shingle. 


