
THE author commences by stating, that no fact among the geological phaenomena presented in both hemispheres, appears to be more clearly determined than the occurrence of granitic rocks of posterior date to deposits containing organic remains of comparatively recent origin. Instances of this position, he says, are exhibited on a great scale in Brittany, Normandy, and the Channel Islands, where quartz rock and schists (the last containing, as will be subsequently shown, vegetable and testaceous remains) have been disturbed by granite and the protrusion of the latter effected by trap ; and he refers to Humboldt’s allusion to the Cotentin in proof of the intimate connexion of quartz rock, schist (occasionally connected with limestone), and granite*; also to the memoir of M. Alex. Brongniart on the Cotentin f, with the note by M. d’Omalius d’Halloy on Brittany J ; likewise to Mr. De la Beche’s paper on Calvados and La Manche § ; as well as the memoirs of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison on Cornwall and Devonshire!, &c., for the occurrence of the same series of rocks under precisely similar conditions in each district^, and for evidences that the granite wras protruded at a comparatively recent period, not only altering the characters of the associated sedimentary strata, but elevating the rocks en masse to their present positions. With respect to the phaenomena exhibited in the Channel Islands, Mr. Clarke says, that the granitic, schistose and quartz rocks are exactly in the range of the analogous formations of the Cotentin ; that the trap of Sercq occurs intermediate to the other deposits, as in the Cotentin ; and that to the protrusion of the trap the actual position of the granite, slates and quartz rock must be assigned.

   Mr. Clarke then describes in some detail the country in the immediate vicinity of Cherbourg, following closely M. Alex. Brongniart’s account of the physical features and lithological structure of the country.
   The district consists of a succession of lofty ranges composed of quartz rock, and of valleys with low hillocks of schists ; and masses of granite and trap occasionally protrude through the other deposits.
   The schists vary in composition, being sometimes argillaceous, sometimes talcose, also in hardness and colour. At Vasterville, to the S.E. of Cherbourg, beds of grey slate and graphite ampelite contain impressions of marine plants ; and at Barneville, to the south of Les Pieux, calcareous strata alternating with schist inclose Terebratulse. One variety of slate, called by M. Brongniart steaschiste no- duleux, consists of a base of green glossy slate, with egg-shaped nodules of quartz, and passes into talc slate, which also contains concretions of felspar and crystalline quartz of very variable size and form, and occasionally penetrated by the talcose matrix.
   The quartz rock assumes also very different degrees of hardness, and changes often in its lithological aspect. Near Vasterville it puts on the character of a ferruginous sandstone and passes into a conglomerate; and though these varieties are stated, on the authority of M. d’Halloy, to be of frequent occurrence, yet Mr. Clarke is of opinion that the ferruginous nature of the rock must be considered as adventitious and of subsequent origin, being impressed also upon the schist. The apparent arenaceous structure of certain beds at Le Roule is stated to disappear under the lens, the whole mass presenting a vitreous fracture. The strata are generally inclined at a considerable angle, but the direction of the dip varies ; they are also occasionally curved. The prevailing strike of both the quartz rock and the schist is from east to west. Insensible gradations from one formation to the other are prevalent; and at Rozel green schist is succeeded by quartz rock, and felspar trap passes into schistose greenstone ; at Flamanville the latter rock also alternates with compact eurite, which changes into rosy syenite, alternating with trap, and is succeeded by regularly stratified beds of syenite, having the same direction with those of the quartz rock. Mr. Clarke gives many other local details, either on his own authority or that of M. Brongniart; and then offers the following general summary of the changes at the lines of junction. The argillaceous and talcose schists, where they are in contact with the quartz rock, partake of a gradual intermixture of the components of that formation, and the same strata in contact with granitic rocks become charged with particles of felspar.
   That the original phsenomena took place whilst the slate was still soft and in the bed of the ocean, Mr. Clarke says, there can be no reasonable doubt; but he is of opinion that the physical outline of the country indicates considerable changes incident to the emergence of the land. The deep transverse valley which intersects the mountain called Le Roule, a little to the east of Cherbourg, is stated to present some interesting phsenomena. The eastern escarpment, from 300 to 320 feet in perpendicular height, slopes gently to the south as far as the commencement of the slate, where the descent becomes extremely rapid into the valley of the Divett. The western side of the ravine presents similar features, but in a reversed position ; the escarpment of quartz rock, crowned by the Telegraph, being to the south, and the slope to the north, with a very gentle inclination till it reaches the sea-level. These opposite interchanges of slope and escarpment are occasioned, Mr. Clarke says, by the direction and prolongation of the beds of slate, the line of coast not exactly corresponding with the junction of the schist and quartz rock. The southern junction of the two formations is about half-way up the ravine, near a chapel; and in the quarries along a road leading eastward, the phsenomena exhibited at the contact of the deposits are well-exhibited. Throughout the district the range of the slate is marked by the fertility of the soil and the occurrence of woods, but that of the quartz-rock by a prevailing barrenness.
   Fragments of the latter formation are either scattered over the surface, associated with clay, or compose mounds free from extraneous matter ; and they preserve the characteristic form of the parent rock, the angles, measured “by a goniometer,” affording three constant quantities, namely 108°, 64°, and 83° (fig. 1.); and the last angle measures also that formed by the production of two sides, which in the actual specimens are cut off by the intersection of a third plane. Fragments of green schist detached by the hammer at the natural joints, gave also the same angles, or 108°, 64°, and 83° (fig. 2.); so that there is direct evidence, Mr. Clarke observes, of the same agent having operated on both formations en masse. The rock of Le Roule presents to the eye two lines of fracture, one parallel to the horizon and the other nearly perpendicular to it, and these, with the lines of dip and direction, produce, the author says, the peculiar outline of the fragments. This structure, Mr. Clarke considers, is due to the arrangement of the component particles in the first instance, and to subsequent agents in the second ; and he is of opinion the phaenomena prove distinctly the truth of Brongniart’s assumption, that these are crystalline and not mechanical rocks. If, he adds, heat was an agent in consolidating these beds, and electrical action was connected with it, the tendency of the strata to assume their characteristic features might be accounted for. Other cases of slates assuming a regular form are mentioned in the paper, particularly one at Boppart, on the Rhine, where the cleavage yielded six-sided tables, somewhat similar to the fragments previously mentioned. 
Fragment of slate from Boppart, on the Rhine.
  The transverse ravine of Le Roule is shown to agree precisely with the strike of veins of pure white quartz, which intersect the strata from south-east to north-west; and Mr. Clarke observes, that this direction of the ravine corresponds with the mechanical effect of elevation; and he dwells at some length on this not being a local phenomenon, but connected with a widely extended operation. The transverse break through the beds of hard chalk at Corfe Castle, on the coast of Dorsetshire, is considered as probably connected with the ravine at Cherbourg; and he proceeds to state, that if the observer extend his researches to Calvados and Brittany, and thence to Devonshire, Weymouth, Purbeck, the Isle of Wight, the Weald of Sussex and Kent, and the Boulonnais, he would be induced to connect some of the most striking phenomena of these districts with probably a contemporaneous series of events.
  The decided similarity of the Devonshire schists and granite with those of the French coast; the similar protrusion of the granite at an epoch much posterior to the production of the slates ; the occurrence of highly inclined beds from the oolites to the tertiary series along the coast of Dorset, dipping, like the rocks of the Cotentin, to the north ; the existence of a series of faults in Dorset ranging in a linear direction with the elevated beds of the Cotentin, as well as another transverse series on tj[ie coasts of England and France, are conditions which appear to agree so accurately under all their bearings, as to induce, the author says, the supposition, that the tract now occupied hy the English Channel between Cape La Hogue and Portland owes its existence to a denudation of deposits intermediate between the slate and the oolites, in the direction of the similar but minor valleys in La Manche ; and that the appearances of elevation so extensively developed on both sides of the Channel owe their origin to one common, deep-seated cause, evidence of which is afforded in the traps and granites of La Manche, Brittany, Devonshire, Cornwall, and the Channel Islands. Lastly, with reference to the belief which had been entertained hy a previous observer, that the western coast of the Cotentin may have originated in a fracture, Mr. Clarke observes, that there is reason to infer that the coast-lines, not only of the Cotentin, but of the Channel Islands, Purbeck and the Isle of Wight, will be found to have been produced by a series of contemporaneous or successive upheavings of the strata in the same linear direction, at an epoch posterior to the formation of the tertiary deposits.

