THE observations detailed in this memoir were made during- 1827, 1828, and 1829, and are arranged under the heads of the physical features of the county, the geological structure, and the effects produced by the causes now in action.
1. PHYSICAL FEATURES.
  The general form of Suffolk is an oblong, of about 47 miles by 27, bounded on the east by the German Ocean, on the south by the river Stour, on the west by the Ouse and Lark, and on the north by the Little Ouse and Waveney. It is impossible not to be struck with the fact, that whilst some of these rivers have a direction from east to west, others flow from N. N. W. to S. S. E., and that the coast section from Harwich to Orford is nearly parallel with the direction of the Waveney ; and if these observations be extended to the adjoining counties of Norfolk and Essex, which are similar in geological structure, an accordance will be found in the direction of the rivers Chelmer, Colne and Blackvvater, and in the estuaries of the Thames and the Crouch.
  How far these river-channels may be due to dynamical action, it is difficult to determine ; but I am of opinion, that when they are studied with reference to the proofs of violent derangement in the north, east and west corners of Norfolk, and the almost unequivocal testimonies of disturbance on the coast of Suffolk, there is sufficient reason to assume that the drainage of Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex, has been induced by a violent strain acting from below, and throwing the whole mass of the country into a position, by which 1200 square miles of Norfolk, and 220 of Suffolk, are drained by Yarmouth Haven, and about 2000 square miles of the latter county, at the S.E. corner.
  Mr. Woodward, in his “ Outline of the Geology of Norfolk” (pp. 1, 2), observes, that from the high ground between Lopham Ford and Brancaster, where the Waveney and Ouse rise within a few feet of each other, and diverge, the rivers of Norfolk flow eastwards and westwards, according to the inclinations of the chalk; and that the valleys of Norfolk are valleys of elevation due to the elevation and fracture of the chalk; and in these statements'I fully concur.
  In addition to the preceding facts it may be added, that the estuaries of the Aide, the Deben, the Orwell, and the Stour, meet the fresh water at nearly the same distance, 11 or 12 miles, from the sea, and at the boundary line of the great continuous bed of diluvium, which covers so extensive an area in that part of England, patches only, of greater .or less extent, being found to the east of the line.
2. THE GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE.
  The formations of which Suffolk consists are, 1, chalk ; 2 and 3, the plastic and London clays ; 4, crag ; 5, diluvium, or ancient superficial detritus ; and 6, recent lacustrine deposits ; the first occupying the N.W. portion of the county ; the second, third and fourth, the S.E.; and the fifth, or diluvium, the intermediate part, resting on all the preceding deposits; while the sixth, or lacustrine accumulations, are of very local occurrence.
  1. Chalk.—In the S.E. of Suffolk this formation contains the usual plates and nodules of flints, and the fossils characteristic of the upper chalk. In making a well at Harwich, the workmen penetrated, at the depth of 94 feet, and between the white and grey chalk, a stratum, 10 feet thick, of sandy, gritty chalk. The beds are in general nearly horizontal; but they are sometimes inclined at considerable angles, and the surface appears to have been violently dislocated, and worn into deep gullies, called, locally, sand-galls. At Harwich, in making two wells, only 70 yards apart, the chalk was reached in the northern at the depth of 88 feet, but in the southern at 64 feet. The variation in the dip of the beds is considerable. At Shelley and Creeling they rise to the N.E. ; at Monk’s Eleigh, scarcely 9 miles distant, to the S.W., at an angle of 15° ; at Offton the rise is also to the S.YV.; but at Hartest to the N., and at Blakenham to the S.
  The general slope of the chalk is from NAY. to the sea. At Sudbury, where it cuts the Stour level, it is about 70 feet above the sea; and at East Bergholt about 16 feet; but at Harwich, from 64 to 88 feet below the sea- level. Again, at Wickham Market the chalk was reached at the depth of 160 feet; and at Woodbridge, six miles distant, at 250 feet from the surface.
  Where the formation has been denuded by the rivers, the tertiary beds frequently rest upon it; but where it rises into an elevation above the river- levels, it is covered altogether by diluvium.

  The formation is principally exposed in the banks of the estuaries and rivers. Thus, along the course of the Lark and Ouse, it is visible at Bury, Horningsheath, Westley, Great Saxham, Little Saxham, Barrow, Welnetham, Fornham All Saints, Fornham St. Genevieve, Fornham St. Martin, Livermere, Ixworth, and thence by Watesfield to near Botesdale. In the valley of the Gipping chalk is exposed, though not continuously, from Stowmarket to Whitton ; coming to the surface at Whitton, Creeting, Blakenham Magna, Blakenham Parva, Claydon, Somersham, Coddenham ; and in the adjoining parishes at Crowfield, to the east of the Gipping, and at Witnesham, where it forms a considerable hill. At Crowfield and Coddenham the chalk is without flints. In the valley of the Stour it appears at Sudbury, Great and Little Cornard, and Chilton, extending nearly to Long Melford. At Ballingdon Hill, opposite Sudbury, chalk has been excavated to the depth of 40 feet, under 123 feet of diluvium; and at Hartest, about eight miles to the north of Sudbury, it occurs, dipping rapidly to the south. At Shelley, near Higham, where the Bret joins the Stour, chalk occurs, close to the church, and in the river bed; it is also visible between Lavenham and Shelley; and it has been quarried under the clay at Well’s Hall, in Brent-Eleigh (Bundilly), Baker’s Farm, and Chellesworth. At Monk’s Eleigh, (Monk Silly) between Cliel- lesworth and Sudbury, the chalk strata dip rapidly to S.W. ; at Semer it crops out close to the river, and is covered by 50 feet of clay and gravel. Chalk is also dug at Cockfield and Bradfield, between Lavenham and Bury. At Hadleigh, between Shelley and Lavenham, the chalk is 102 feet below the surface. It occurs also at Aldham, Needham (18 feet from the surface), Nedging, at a great depth, Whatfield (40 feet), Wattisham Offton, Willisham (146 feet), Barking (94 feet), Flowton (90 feet), Bramford Hall (90 feet), Willisham Hall (200 feet), Creeting (23 feet); above the valley of the Stour it has been found at East Bergholt (126 feet); at Helmingham Hall, to the east of Coddenham (57 feet) ; Wickham Market (160 feet) ; Woodbridge (250 feet), 150 feet also of chalk, with flints, having been cut through ; Woolpit (40 feet) ; and at Harwich, as already stated, it was found, at the depth of 64 feet, in West Street; and 70 yards to the north, at 88 feet from the surface.
  2. Plastic Clay.—There is some difficulty in separating this deposit from the diluvium of Suffolk. At certain points, however, as at the chalk-pit near Shelley Church (see section 16, p. 373), the brick-pits at Higham Bridge (see p. 372), the St. Helen’s brick-pits at Ipswich (see p. 382), at Bramford (p. 380), Whitton (p. 379), Great Cornard, near Sudbury, Harwich (p. 370), East Bergholt, Brent Eleigh, Copdock, the descent from Flowton to Offton, between Offton and Bramford, and at other places, it presents beds of mottled clay, sand, or pebbles, agreeing in character with the strata of plastic clay in other parts of the kingdom. From its occurring only at detached points, 1 am of opinion that it has been exposed to great denudations ; and from its position at particular localities, that it has partaken, in part at least, of the dislocations which have affected the chalk.
  3. London Clay.—This formation presents, in Suffolk, the usual characters, and contains layers of cement stones. At Walton-in-the-Naze, and Bawdsey (Plate XXXI., fig. 2.), considerable quantities of pyritous vegetable remains are washed up from a bed below the level of the sea; and they rival in variety and abundance the Sheppey fossils.

  The furthest western or inland point at which the formation is visible, is at Layham, near Hadleigh*; the country beyond being covered by diluvial clay. It constitutes, however, the substratum of all the districts intersected by the estuaries of theS.E. of Suffolkf,and the coast section from Orford Ness to Walton Naze (Plate XXXI., fig. 1 to 5 and 7), being everywhere capped by crag, exceptat Havergate Island, in the Ore. This section is constantly varying in its features, but presented, when I examined it in 1827, the appearance of beds once horizontal, having been upheaved in some places, and depressed in others; but to what extent these disturbances may have been produced by elevatory movements, the action of the sea, or the undermining of land-springs, I could not satisfactorily determine. The supply of water obtained from the formation appears to be governed by local phaenomena. At East Bergholt a well was dug, to the depth of 40 feet, in London clay, without success ; but in excavating a cellar at the distance of a few feet, a copious spring was tapped, and conveyed into the well by a channel. In the river Ore is an island of London clay, in which two wells were sunk through 80 feet of clay, 3 inches of rock, and 20 feet of sand. The water rose to the surface, had a strong smell of sulphur, but no saline taste, though it overflowed only during high tide in the river.
  The fossils are confined to fishes teeth, and the occasional occurrence of shells; but in the clay of the West Rocks, off Harwich, fossil turtles have been found.
  4. Crag.—The term crag is applied in Suffolk only to the shelly beds, and the word gravel to the associated beds of pebbles, as well as to the accumulations of superficial drift stones. The portion of the country occupied by the deposit, is bounded on the west by a line, connecting the water-head of the estuaries ; and the most southern part at which it is now visible are Blackbrook Hill, near Dedham, and Langham. The patch at Walton Naze has been considerably reduced by the partial destruction of the cliffs (Plate XXXI., fig. 4, 5, and 7.). The sand, however, in which the shells occur at Blackbrook, I have traced to Ardleigh Wood near Colchester, and it is said that Danbury Hill, near Chelmsford, is capped by crag, but I doubt the accuracy of this observation. The general area of the surface occupied by the formation within the county of Suffolk, is a platform of nearly uniform elevation, but it has been worn into ridges and valleys, apparently by currents acting in parallel lines from N.E. to S. W., and the cliffs both in the interior and on the coast are sections of these ridges. The dip and inclination of the crag agree with those of the London clay., and therefore I infer, that both were denuded by the same currents, and while they
were beneath the level of the sea, and that they were equally acted upon by the same elevating movements. According to my observation, the deposit nowhere extends beyond twelve or thirteen miles from the coast, and at Pakefield, where the diluvial clay comes to the very edge of the sea, it disappears as a surface deposit, but re-appears at intervals further north between that point and Cromer. Though crag is undoubtedly discoverable here and there, in situ, as a regular formation north of the Waveney, yet I by no means allow that it is regularly stratified as an undisturbed deposit between Leiston and Pakefield. I am fully convinced, from observation, that the diluvial clay and crag are distinct deposits ; and I am almost equally convinced that, if the crag has any share in the formation of the cliffs between the Blithe and Lake Lothing, it has been affected by disturbances of a similar nature to those which are presented in the cliffs of East Norfolk. That the crag may have
occupied the localities, there is no reason to deny; but they now present no traces of an undisturbed deposit.
  To the previous descriptions of the structure of the crag, I have nothing to add, except that where the shells are not visible, the sands contain a slight mixture of calcareous matter. I object to the separation of the beds with shells from those without; as the shifting of a sand bank would correctly account for the occasional occurrence of beds thirty feet thick resting upon strata inclosing testacea.
  Believing that the true rationale of the crag is to be found in the hypothesis of sand banks inhabited by testacea, and situated in a tidal way exposed to violent fluctuations of the sea, as well as subject to drifts of extraneous matter
from land waters, I see nothing extraordinary in the idea that accumulations of sand and shingle may have formed a part of that deposit in which the crag is regularly stratified ; but I cannot consent to such accumulations, though contemporaneous with the crag, being classed with it under that name; much less can I consent to diluvial clay being also included in it.
  If, then, we assume that in the tertiary sea sand banks were formed, around the shelves and under the lee of which testacea collected, lived and died, as at present, many of the phaenomena of the crag may be readily solved ; and we shall not need to wonder why the bivalve shells are found lying with the flat sides to the strata of sand, why the young are congregated in one group and the old in another, why flints and pebbles are found covered with balani, or why the remains of terrestrial mammalia are associated with those of whales and fishes.


  With respect to Mr. Charlesworth’s subdivision of the crag into two ages, I folly agree, with a qualification of the word age. If that gentleman had said different periods of the same era, I could find no difficulty in admitting the justness of the classification, as not only the species but genera of shells are differently grouped according to localities. The Norwich crag, I also admit, differs from the Suffolk ; and, on the authority of Mr. Woodward, I may state, that bowldered Suffolk shells occur in the beds at Thorpe. The corals of the lower bed, I am of opinion, betoken a warmer climate ; and if during the crag era the earth gradually cooled, the change from a coralline deposit to one more nearly related to the inhabitants of the present era, would be the natural and inevitable result.
  I fully assent, also, to the observations brought forward by Mr. Charlesworth in a paper read before the British Association at Bristol, on the mixed nature of the deposits now forming on the coast of East Anglia, in which the fossil remains of the adjacent cliffs are intermingled with the shells of existing species; and I was acquainted with examples long before the reading of that paper.
  As to the necessity of separating the diluvium from the crag, there can be no question. The gravel found in the latter, if carefully examined, will be acknowledged to differ from regular diluvial gravel: its occurrence only betokens diluvial action during the period of the crag. That such actions have been often repeated there can be no doubt, for the beds of superficial gravel of Suffolk and Dorsetshire are evidently not of one period ; and no one who has studied gravel deposits accurately, can refuse to admit, that there have been more than one occurrence of diluvial action, after the deposition of the tertiary formations. In Norfolk, it is true, that crag is involved in the clay; but if this clay, which in that county is 400 and in Suffolk 300 feet thick, be one with the crag, it is most curious that a line of demarcation should actually exist between the districts in Suffolk, occupied by these deposits, and that the clay is never found below or intermixed with the crag. Moreover, this diluvial clay has been traced not only into Norfolk, but into Cambridgeshire and Essex, close up to me metropolis. In Suffolk the same line which bounds the London clay bounds the diluvial. The only rational conclusion is, that during the crag era, an extraordinary convulsion took place, which shook the whole country. Diluvial clay and gravel occur in cavities in the crag on Alderton Common, and near Stratford St. Mary’s, at the sixtieth mile-stone from London. (Plate XXXI., fig. 6.)
  Respecting the conchological history of the crag I offer no remarks; partly because it does not fall within my object in writing this paper, and partly because the notes, which I formerly made, have been lost.

  Diluvium.—The diluvium of Suffolk may be divided into three classes :
1. clay; 2. gravel; 3. erratic blocks.
  1. Diluvial clay.—This deposition covers a great portion of the county, and extends into Norfolk, Cambridgeshire and Essex, rising to a considerable elevation in High Suffolk, and having, near Cromer, a thickness of 400 feet. A large portion of the clay is of a yellowish hue, but the greater part is blue ; and both varieties contain chalk pebbles, sometimes disposed in layers, but more commonly dispersed, a character by which the diluvial clay may be distinguished from the London or plastic clays. It is difficult to determine the origin of this argillaceous deposit; but I am inclined to think that the yellowish portion may have been derived from the plastic clay, and the blue, in consequence of its peculiar fossils, from the clays below the chalk. Fragments of coal have been found in the diluvium at Lavenham, also fragments of mica slate containing garnets and tourmaline. Specimens of a similar rock were found by Mr. R. C. Taylor at Cromer, with masses of granite, porphyry, trap, oolites, and every other rock above the coal-measures. At Ballingdon Hill, near Sudbury, Mr. Brown has procured thirty varieties of primary, secondary and tertiary rocks. Comparatively few flints occur in the clay. At Ickworth, a beautiful specimen of the Dudley trilobite was obtained in making a drain, and at various other localities, numerous tertiary and secondary fossils abound. It is inferred that the clay contains cavities, as streams of foul air occasionally issue from fissures.
  It is difficult to define accurately the boundary of the clay. Smith’s map is correct in the general outline. The eastern limits range from Wangford near Southwold, with occasionally slight interruptions,, to Parham, Otley, and Henley. Passing the Gipping, it extends to Shelley, and thence to Clare, Haverhill, and Newmarket. From the last locality it may be defined by a line passing from the edge of the chalk to the N.W. into Norfolk.
  2. Gravel.—The gravel is less generally diffused than the clay, and though there are instances in which it underlies the clay, and others in which the two are mixed up, yet I consider the gravel to have been partly deposited at a distinct period. In some places, as near Sudbury, it consists merely of unrolled flints; in others, large masses of flint, slightly mixed with chalk pebbles, are imbedded in sand ; and occasionally, flints are intermingled with bowlders, of various dimensionsand sometimes unknown origin. Many of the extraneous fragments found in the gravel, I think may have been washed out of the clay; and I am of opinion that the river valleys have been excavated both through the clay and the gravel. With regard to the relative quantity of each ingredient, the chalk flints are the most numerous, primary and transition rocks the next in abundance, and secondary and tertiary the fewest in number; the absence of the latter being easily explained by their inferior hardness. At Stratford St. Mary, and East Bergholt, I have collected specimens of nearly every rock in England to the N.W. of Suffolk.
  3. Erratic Blocks.—These bowlders consist of granite, porphyry, basalt, limestone, and the sandstones of the various formations, and occur in great abundance, and occasionally of vast size. They are sometimes found in the river valleys, and sometimes on the level platforms and hills. They agree in lithological characters with the smaller fragments of the gravel, and are considered to be of the same diluvial origin, but are so conspicuous as to deserve a distinct notice. Among numerous other localities I may mention Copdock, East Bergholt, the valley between Thorington Street and Scotland Street, near Stoke ; and at Flatford Mill in East Bergholt parish.
  Lacustrine Deposits.—Under this head I must notice the bed containing freshwater shells, discovered by Mr. Charlesworth and Mr. Searles Wood on the banks of the Stour at Stutton, and that described by Mr. Brown, at Copford near Colchesterf, which contains similar shells, also bones of the Ox and Deer: accumulations at Grays near Purfleet and at Southend in Essex, inclosing the same testacea, but associated with the remains of the elephant, rhinoceros, deer, ox, bear, &c. have been described by Mr. MorrisJ.
  Causes in action.—Under this head 1 shall confine my observations to the action of the sea on the coast, the changes produced by fluviatile accumulations being of little importance. My first acquaintance with the coast about Bawdsey was in 1814, between which period and 1829 a battery which stood 100 yards beyond the present low-water mark has been dismantled, and the life-boat house has been three times removed to a distance of a quarter of a mile at least in rear of its original position. The destruction between the Aide and Bawdsey Cliff during the last twenty years is calculated to have been upwards of 100 acres, and the coast between that cliff and Baw dsey Haven is said to have diminished about two yards annually. Similar remarks apply to the cliff between the Deben and Harwich Harbour, batteries and martello towers having been successively undermined. During the time of the Romans there was a castle in the cliffs at Felixstow, built by Constantine to guard the entrance of Orwell Haven. Holingshed says the earl of Leicester landed therein 1173; but in 1176, Henry II. overthrew the castle. In 1722 the ruins extended 100 feet in length, were 5 feet high and 12 feet broad ; pebbles and Roman brick being the principal materials. Lumps of the walls were then visible upon the shore, and at low water in the sea. The cliffs were at that time about 100 feet high. In 1740 some of the ruins still existed; but in 1766, Grose says the remains of the castle were visible at low water, the cliff being gone, and he adds, that a person, then living, remembered the ruins 50 yards within the cliff top. In 1829, when I had the cliffs measured, they varied from 20 to 80 feet in height. According to the above statement, at least 200 yards have been destroyed within the last century.
  In 941 the church at Walton Naze stood a considerable distance inland ; about 50 years since the church and burial ground remained, but now not a fragment of either is left. In 885 a battle was fought between Alfred and the Danes at the mouth of the Stour, where the shingle bank now is.
  Harwich also is said to have arisen, in consequence of the destruction of Orwell, which stood on the spot now termed the west rocks, and was swallowed up by an inroad of the sea since the conquest. While this destruction is proceeding bn one part of the coast, new sand banks are accumulating at others, by which the ancient entrance in the estuary of the Stour and the Orwell has been filled up, and those rivers compelled to make a new line of communication with the sea.
  The following conclusions I conceive may be deduced from the statements given in the body of the memoir from which the above extracts are taken.
  1. The substratum of the whole of Suffolk, Norfolk, and Essex is chalk, which appears to have been dislocated and worn into deep hollows by the action of water, previously to the commencement of the tertiary era.
  2. On this abraded surface the plastic clays and sands were formed, but not over the whole area.
  3. Partly on these beds and partly on the chalk the London clay was then deposited, but to no very great thickness in Suffolk.
  4. Upon the London clay as well as the chalk the crag was next accumulated upon sand banks produced by the tidal waters and currents, and around projecting masses of chalk.
  5. While the crag still lay beneath the sea, a violent catastrophe broke up many of the secondary strata, from the chalk to the lias inclusive, and the debris thus caused, together with numerous masses of ancient rocks, was spread by a rush of water over the surface of the tertiary formations and the chalk, in some places to a depth of 400 feet, constituting the beds of drift clay, &c., which occupy so great an area in Suffolk; and it was extended to the edge of the then existing sea coast, which appears to be defined by the western limit of the crag.

  6. Previously to this diluvial action, and after it, the inland waters of the then dry land bore to the sea, animal and vegetable remains, vestiges of which occur on the Norfolk coast and elsewhere.
  7. The climate of this part of the globe was then different from the present.
  8. After this period, and probably in prolongation of the first great catastrophe, a series of shocks acting from below shattered the surface, and gradually elevated the whole district, including the chalk, till the crag obtained the height of nearly 100 feet above the level of the sea; and by this movement were produced the valleys or lines of fissures through which the drainage of the county is effected ; and during this operation the beds of gravel were partly accumulated.
  9. No great convulsions have since taken place.
  10. By the action of springs and the constant battering of the sea, the superficial contents of the London clay and crag have been reduced several miles, vestiges of their former extent being traceable in rocks and sands nearly always submerged.
  11. By the set of the tides, vast accumulations of shingle and sand have been formed at projecting points, protecting, in some places, the cliffs from further destruction ; but at Harwich Bay they have blocked up the ancient estuary, and compelled the Stour and the Orwell to form a new outlet.
  12. The average amount of annual degradation of the coast is about two yards in breadth ; and, in consequence of the conformation of the ridges of crag and London clay, the cliffs will gradually diminish into a low, sandy shore. The period estimated for effecting this destruction is calculated to be another century.
  The following account of wells and sections was obtained by personal observations or from authentic information, and it is given to assist in illustrating the preceding remarks. The localities are disposed geographically for the sake of comparing the sections nearest each other ; but to enable the reader who may wish to study the structure of the different deposits at all the points mentioned, the accompanying numerical lists, arranged under each formation, are added.

