THE Satruda or Sutluj river, taking its source in the lake of Riwan, contiguous to the celebrated Manasarover, within the Himalaya mountains, descends through a long valley of that lofty range, in a westerly and southwesterly direction towards Hindustan. It issues from the Himalaya, at a distance of fourteen miles from Rampur, the capital of Basahar: the mountainous chain runs north-west towards Cashmir; and the river cuts it at half a right angle. The subsequent course of the stream traverses a hilly tract of less elevation, comprising a part of Basahar with Handur and Calur (of which the capitals are Bilaspur and Palasiya); until finally it emerges into the plain of Hindustan.
Within the snowy mountains the valley of the Sutluj bears the name of Khanawer: which designates a tract of country extending eastward to Shipki, the frontier town of the Chinese territory,—and northward to Shialcar, a fort of Basahar, upon the borders of Latac, on the banks of the river Li, which joins the Sutluj under the village of Namgia, the last of Basahar.
The Li, nearly equal in size to the Sutluj, has its source south of Leh, the capital of Latac. Its course is southerly to its confluence with the Sutluj.
The district of Khanawer, or middle valley of the Sutluj, stretches twentyfive miles along the banks of the Li to Chango and Shialcar.
The upper valley of the Sutluj, from its source, in the Rawan-hrad to the town of Shipki. lies within the Chinese territory. A considerable portion of it was seen by Mr. Moorcroft in his journey to the Manasarover, a narrative of which is published in the twelfth volume of Researches of the Asiatic Society.
The lower valley of the Sutluj, from the spot whore it hursts from the Himalaya, until it reaches the flat country, is easily accessible to examination and research.
The middle valley, comprising Khanawer, had been visited by Capt. Hodgson in June 1816. It has been explored by Lieut. A. Gerard, assisted by his brother, in the progress of a geographical survey on which they were employed in the autumn of 1818. The narrative of their route has been communicated to the Asiatic Society, and will be inserted in the fourteenth volume of that Society's Researches. Their geological observations and collections, purposely made for me, at the instance of Dr.Wallich, a member of this Society, have been obligingly communicated; and enable me to lay before this meeting the geological specimens collected by them, with satisfactory information as to their local position, whence conclusions may with confidence be drawn regarding the general structure of the country.
Too much praise cannot be given to the indefatigable exertions of those gentlemen; who, while engaged in a laborious survey and arduous journey, had zeal and perseverance to devote unceasing attention to geological inquiry, under circumstances most discouraging.
They laboured under the disadvantage, as Lieut. Gerard modestly expresses himself, of being unacquainted with mineralogy: yet an ample collection of specimens was every day made. The greater part of these was however lost; and not a few mixt and confounded by the carelessness of servants; notwithstanding the precaution of originally putting the specimens in separate covers, with the names of the places where they were collected distinctly specified.
  At the three highest peaks visited by them, 16,921, 18,493, and 19,411 feet above the level of the sea, they picked up a number of different stones: but as the ascent was upwards of 7000 feet in each instance, and extremely fatiguing not to mention excessive debility and severe head-ache experienced at those great elevations, it is not surprising that the attendants to whom the specimens were handed, often threw them away as fast as they were collected: and neither threats nor entreaties could prevail with the people to carry more than a very few.
The three days employed in visiting those high peaks, as Lieut. Gerard observes in a letter to Dr. Wallich, were truly disastrous. Thermometers, barometers, perambulators, and theodolites were broken in pieces. The temperature was 22° below the freezing point of Fahrenheit at half-past four p. m., and they had near 8000 feet to descend, over the most frightful road, to reach their camp. The people threw away every specimen collected: the surveyors were themselves burdened with their instruments and journals, which they would not trust in other hands. Night overtook them, and they lost their road. Most of their servants passed the night at a great elevation without fire; and next day few of them could move, owing to soreness of their feet. These circumstances, he goes on to say, will account for the few varieties of rock and the smallness of the pieces collected at different places.
  In another letter he remarks, that, owing to the length of the daily marches, and the requisite attention to the trigonometrical survey of the valley, the barometrical altitudes and geometrical measurement of peaks of the Himalaya, observations of the limit of snow and congelation, and of the nature of the rocks,— they found it impracticable to devote more attention to the riches of the vegetable and mineral kingdoms. In saying that they noticed the texture and disposition of the rocks, he implies only the general appearance of what constituted the base of the line of route, picking up fragments that lay upon the way, without the application of a hammer,—which unfortunately was lost.
The primary object of the journey was, to approximate towards the extreme height of Manasarover by barometrical measurement of the bed of the Sutluj, at the furthest limit of their advance; observing in their progress the gradual rise, direction, and diminution of the bed; taking latitudes and longitudes of places, and determining positions of villages and line of route. These objects occupied their foremost thoughts, and, without the expense of that time which was due to those prominent objects, they could not well have obtained more success in their geological collections.
Wearied by a daily march of eight or ten and sometimes twelve hours with only a single halt during a month and a half, having no conveyance but their own feet, travelling by rugged roads over stupendous mountains, they were compelled to leave many things undone. The survey of the route and measurement of heights occupied generally their whole time from sunrise to sunset; after which they were employed till midnight, taking astronomical observations and gathering information respecting neighbouring countries.
  I quote these apologies on account of the interesting picture drawn of difficulties encountered: but an excuse was unnecessary; for, notwithstanding the loss of many specimens, and the confusion which unfortunately has crept among not a few of those preserved, a great number remains; which having received safely, 1 have now the gratification of presenting to the Geological Society.
The specimens to which I shall first draw the attention of the Society are from the lower valley of the Sutluj; taken from the banks of that river, between Kangal and Suniya, at the elevation of 2000 feet above the level of the sea. The banks of the Sutluj are there composed of limestone, apparently primitive. The general inclination of the strata is stated to be ten or fifteen degrees, and the direction much diversified.
  At Jauri, on the northern bank of the Sutluj, in the vicinity of the places above mentioned, or nearly half way between them, hot springs issue at so small a distance as two or three feet from the river. They are eight or ten in number. A thermometer plunged into one of them rose to 130° Fahr., while the temperature of the river was 61° on the 11th of October. The water bubbles up among small pebbles, has a strong sulphureous smell and very disagreeable brackish taste, and encrusts the stones with a yellow substance (Qu. sulphur).
Gold-dust is found in small quantities, among the sands of the river, near this place.
The next specimens for notice are from the Gisiganga, a stream tributary to the Jamuna. The banks of that river for many miles, between Ki'irla and Scrmur, consist of limestone, and of a rock containing chlorite and mica. The bed of the river in that part has an elevation of 1500 to 2000 feet above the sea.
Among the specimens is a stalactite, from the roof of a cave near the top of the Carol mountain. The cavern is situated about 6500 feet above the sea, Mr. J. B. Fraser likewise, in the narrative of his journey through the Himalaya mountains, has noticed the Sein range of hills, on the right bank of the Giriganga, as formed of calcareous stone.
  It appears then, that limestone is prevalent in the lower hills, which adjoin to the Himalaya, and are contiguous to the lower valley of the Sutluj.
From the valley of the Paber river, another tributary of the Jamuna, specimens have been furnished. One from the banks of that river, near Cshirgaon, at an elevation of 6000 feet above the sea: it is gneiss. Another is from the confluence of the Paber and Sisun rivers, at an elevation of 8350 feet above the sea. The rock consists of gneiss.
Lieut. Gerard crossed the Himalaya at the Bruing pass, to enter the middle valley of the Sutluj. It is the route of communication between this valley and that of the Paber. Its extreme altitude is 15,100 feet above the sea. A variety of specimens was collected at this pass. They consist of mica-slate, gneiss and granite; some of them containing garnets; others tourmalin. Veins occur of quartz and mica, and of quartz and hornblende.
The travellers proceeded along the left bank of the Sutluj to Puari and Rispc, at which last-mentioned place they met Lama priests. Thence they advanced to Marang, a large town upon the left bank of the Sutluj, at an elevation of 8500 feet above the sea.
The Bespa river, a tributary of the Sutluj, falls into it ten miles north of the Bruang pass. At the station of Puari, near the confluence of those rivers, the mean height of the bed of the Sutluj is 6300 feet above the level of the sea. The stream flows over rounded pebbles of granite, with sand. The rocks, which constitute the banks, are inclined to the horizon at an angle of twenty-five or thirty degrees, and dip to the eastward. From specimens collected there, they appear to consist of granite, gneiss, quartz compact and granular, and quartz with mica.
The valley of the Baspa. river has been recently visited, that is, in October 1819, by Lieut. Herbert, the companion of Captain Hodgson in his arduous survey of the Ganges to near its source above Gangawatri. He crossed the ridge of the Himalaya by a pass which is situated between the cataracts at the head of the Rupin river and the sources of the Baspa. The elevation of the pass was ascertained by him, according to Archdeacon Wollaston's method, and determined at something more than 15,000 feet. Snow lay on its acclivity, and no vegetation was observed; unless the discoloration of the rock implies the presence of lichens. Mr. Herbert remarks, that nothing was visible but bare black rock crowned with snow.
Between Puari and Rispe, from 6500 to 9800 feet above the sea, the rocks, most part of the way, are formed of a whitish crumbling granite. The Cailas or Raldang mountains on the south, an assemblage of pointed peaks covered with snow, and more than 20,000 feet above the sea, appear to be composed of the same kind of rock; viz. whitish granite. The specimens collected in this portion of the route exhibit granite and gneiss.
  In the bed of the Tidong rivulet, two miles east of Rispe, are found quartz rock, and granite containing tourmalin. The bed of the rivulet is 7,600 feet above the sea. The rocks near this consist of mica-slate, with tortuous veins of white granite, of various breadth, running in every direction.
Overhanging the town of Marang is a mountain of clay-slate. Upon it, at an elevation of 12,000 feet, heath, juniper, and gooseberry bushes were growing.
The travellers, proceeding to the Tungrang pass, observed the rocks on the way, chiefly formed of compact quartz with chlorite. The pass itself, which is 13,740 feet above the sea, and is connected on the south with a group of snowy peaks about 20,000 feet in height, exhibited clay-slate with pyrites and with mica.
  A greater variety of specimens was collected a few miles further, between Nisang and Kcipu-ghat. The strata, according to Lieut. Gerard's observation, run north-west and south-east, and dip to the north-east at an angle of forty or forty-five degrees. The height is from 9000 to 13,500 feet above the sea. The specimens there collected exhibit granite, gneiss, mica-slate, cyanite with quartz and mica, actinolitc and quartz with garnet, pyrites in quartz, limestone (blucish-grey with white veins), and calcareous tufa.
The route led next to a spar bridge over the Sutluj, at Namptii, passing by the way a rivulet named Hocho. Between that rivulet and Namptu-sango, at heights of from 8200 to 11,400 feet above the sea, granite with and without tourmalin, gneiss, mica-slate, drawing-slate, and clay-slate with imbedded specks of sparry iron-ore, were found. The bed of the river is 8220 feetabove the sea. It exhibits only two sorts of rock,—mica-slate, and granular quartz with imperfectly crystallized hornblende.
The progress of their survey conducted the travellers, over rocks of gneiss and granite containing tourmalin and garnet, to NamgTa, at the confluence of the Li river and Sutluj. The banks of the rivers at their confluence consist of granite. Further up the Li river, the banks of it present slate, potters'-clay, marl or loam, and sand. Among specimens here collected occur flinty slate and stalactitic carbonate of lime; gypsum of a yellowish-white colour and fine granular texture, and white granular anhydrite. Still higher up the same river, in the vicinity of Chango, a place situated on the left bank of the river, where its bed is no less than 9900 feet above the level of the sea, the specimens collected exhibit primitive granular limestone, with disseminated pyrites; also mica-slate, with what appears to be part of a vein of granite.
Between NamgTa and Shipke, a town situated on the Sutluj, where the channel of the river is 9000 feet above the level of the sea, the rocks consist of granite with and without tourmalin and garnets, gneiss, mica-slate, compact quartz, quartz and mica with cyanite, and some steatite.
This town, or collection of tents, is within the limits of Chinese territory and terminated the survey eastward. The travellers however visited Shipkeghati, a pass to the westward of north from the town. The height of the pass exceeds 13,500 feet above the sea; and at the summit specimens were collected, among which there occur gneiss with hornblende, cyanite in quartz, and a substance much resembling cinnamon stone in mica-slate, and with felspar and mica.
  North of this pass is the Tarhigang mountain, which Lieut. Gerard ascended to the prodigious height of 19,411 feet above the level of the sea. The summit of the mountain, concluded to be 22,000 feet high, was less than two miles distant from the station which they reached. Two specimens have been preserved which were found at that station: one is granular limestone, the other granite with tourmalin and garnet. The stones lie there in immense detached masses, heaped upon one another in frightful confusion.
Eastward of that pass, in the bed of a rivulet named Ripsang, at the height of 11,000 feet above the sea, a number of specimens were collected, comprising granite, gneiss, mica-slate, quartz and tourmalin, and calcareous tufa. The rocks on either side of the rivulet are precipitous, composed of varieties of loose stones piled upon one another in wild disorder.
Northward of the Sutluj, between two ranges of the Himalaya, in the route of the survey returning westward, specimens were collected between Sangnam and Labrang, which consist of clay-slate, quartz rock, and a stone very like compact felspar, with mica, and compact limestone of a smoke grey colour and splintery fracture.
Between Rarang and Pangi, gneiss, and granite with and without tourmalin and garnet, occurred.
Between Pangi and Rogi gneiss was found. Between Rogi and Miru grey granite was noticed. Between Miru and Wangtu both granite and gneiss were the rocks observed.
  In the bed of the Sutluj, at Wangtu, where a bridge of ropes has been thrown across the river, the rocks consist of granite and gneiss. The channel of the stream at this place has an elevation of 5250 feet above the sea.
The R61 or Shatul pass over the Himalaya mountains, the route by which the surveyors returned from their arduous journey, is nearly 15,000 feet above the sea. The rocks at its summit consist of gneiss. The peaks on either side, rising to an elevation of nearly 3000 feet more, appear to be formed of the same rock. The rocks on the southern face of the Himalaya descending from the R61 pass, at the height of 12,000 feet above the sea, are ascertained to be generally composed of gneiss. On the northern face of the mountains ascending from the Sutluj to the R61 pass, the prevalent rock was found to be granular quartz. It lies in immense compact masses.
Besides the specimens which have been noticed, with reference to the precise spots where they were collected, a considerable number has also been received which had been mixed and confounded; but which Lieut. Gerard believes to have been collected by him in his progress along the banks of the Sutluj, between Rispe and Marang, Keipu-ghat and Hocho-nadi, Namgla, and Nako. They consist of granite, gneiss, mica-slate, clay-slate, compact quartz with chlorite, and primitive limestone. Several of the specimens of granite contain crystallized tourmalin and garnet; and also a rolled pebble of compact smoke grey limestone. In one instance an alluvial aggregate occurs.
  I have enumerated the specimens forwarded by Lieut. Gerard at some length, and connected with them the information supplied by his letters and memoranda communicated to me, for the sake of authenticating the geological facts which are ascertained in this way, by means of researches conducted without previous knowledge of the science. I need hardly add, that the primitive character of these lofty mountains, at every spot visited, is precisely what was to be expected.
  It is worthy of notice, that throughout the tract explored, granite, gneiss, mica-slate, quartz rock, and limestone, appear every where alternating with each other; and that limestone, as well as granite, was picked up at the greatest elevation which was attained.
Though the topic be unconnected with the immediate subject of this paper, I cannot quit Lieut. Gerard's letters and memoranda without quoting from them the very surprising circumstance, that seeds of a species of campanula were gathered by him'at the elevation of 16,800 feet above the level of the sea; on a spot where the temperature was 27° of Fahrenheit's thermometer at noon in the middle of October. The latitude was nearly 32° north. Shrubs were found by him in a vegetating state still higher.

