The information which I now lay before the Society is chiefly, and almost exclusively, grounded upon communications received from Mr. David Scott, Commissioner at Cooch-Behar in Bengal, who has obligingly furnished specimens of the rocks collected by him in his visits to divers parts of the district under his authority, and liberally communicated observations made by him on the spot. They are valuable as the genuine remarks of an attentive observer, not indeed profoundly skilled in geology, but divested of all bias of preconceived opinions: and I use his communications with entire confidence.
The specimens which have reached me were collected near the north-east corner of Bengal, where more than one river of note, issuing from the bordering mountains, enter the plain.
The Brahm-putra, a river which meets the principal and eastern branch of the Ganges at no great distance from their common junction with the sea, emerges from the mountains at the north-east angle of Bengal, after a long course in the Himalaya. The hilly country, which it last traverses, is Asham, rarely visited and little known. Our acquaintance with its geological character is confined to the mountains that give passage to the Brahm-putra, thence issuing into the plain.
  On the northern bank of the river in that position is a hill at Jogigopa, which is connected, not however without some breaks or intervals, with the Bhotan mountains. The body of the hills consists of a large hemispherical mass of gneiss. On either side of it is granite; graphic granite on the one hand, and granite of a different character and middling-sized grain on the other. The last-mentioned rock is in nearly vertical masses (Mr. Scott terms them strata), the direction of which is from north-east to south-west. Toward the west graphic granite occurs, on the top of a large mass of gneiss. It appears to be divided by transverse fissures into rhomboid forms; a few cracks crossing the rhombs diagonally.
Paglanath is a hill on the south side of the Brahm-putra, being the north western extremity of the range marked on maps as opposite to Jogigopa. The rock, in the only place where it is exposed, has been much affected by the weather. It appears to consist of gneiss. The masses (or strata) run from north-east to south-west, dipping to the south-east at an angle of about fortyfive degrees. They are crossed by transverse cracks from south-east to northwest, and veins of quartz in some places follow that direction.
  At Gwalpara, some miles eastof Paglanat'h,graniteisfound. Amongspecimens received from thence, is one which consists of felspar, hornblende and mica.
The Brahm-putra, shortly after its entrance on Bengal, receives from the Bhotan mountains the tributary stream of the Gadadhar, which has its source near Tesisudon. Near their confluence is the hill of Dhabni: it rises not more than thirty or forty feet above the level of the adjacent plain; and the lower portion of the acclivity has been covered by alluvial soil. But on the southeast and north-east sides of it, where it has been cut by the waters of the Gadadhar and Brahm-putra rivers, good sections are observed. The banks are there composed of crumbling gneiss and large-grained granite; in some places intermixed; in others distinct and alternating. The position of the masses (or strata) varies from an almost vertical one to an angle of forty-five degrees; and where they incline, it seems to be to the south-west; that is, they dip to the north-east. The direction is nearly south-east and north-west. On the north corner, the hill terminates in the river in large blocks of gneiss, which are nearly perpendicular where they join the body of the hill. Blocks of green stone, containing metallic specks, apparently of magnetic iron ore, are found in various parts of the bank.
  A little lower down, the Brahm-putra receives the Kelanki river from the Garo hills. It issues from those hills about hit. 25° 4C, and long. 1° 4CK east of Calcutta. At their confluence, and on the left side of the river, a precipitous bank occurs, exhibiting graphic granite and gneiss. This rock constitutes the lower part of the hill. In the bed of the river are found blocks of stone of different sorts; as granite, gneiss, various compounds of quartz and felspar, and quartz united with felspar and hornblende.
  On the left bank of the Brahm-putra are the Caribari hills or cliffs. Prom the confluence of the Calu, where it comes in contact with these hills, to Mahendraganj, where they recede eastward, the appearance is nearly uniform. The cliffs in general consist, at the bottom, of slate-clay disposed horizontally. Above this, and in some places below it, there is a stratum of yellow (or, more properly, green) sand, which is often found indurated at the bottom, and accompanied by ferruginous concretions. Over this there is in many places a stratum of slate-clay; and above that the bank consists of sand, white or red, and mixed with gravel. The strata are in general horizontal, or nearly so. No prevailing dip was perceived; but contortions of the strata were remarked, which rise and fall slightly in different parts of the bank, in both directions, as if deposited over an irregular surface. They are in some places entirely interrupted by banks of indurated clay or loam. These interruptions are of small extent; and the horizontal strata soon re-appear on either side of them. In general the uppermost layer of clay coincides in a remarkable manner with the height of the river in the rainy season: but in a few instances it is continued to the top of the bank or acclivity. The lower clay is in many places divided by alternate layers of sand in a very irregular manner: more than eighty alternate layers have been counted.
The general appearance of the cliffs shows the following strata in succession, beginning from beneath; viz. 1st, slate-clay, of the thickness of twelve feet above the lowest level of the river in the dry season: its depth below that level is undetermined; 2d, ferruginous concretions and indurated sand, to a thickness of from three to eight feet; 3d, yellow (or rather green) sand, from three to eight feet: 4th, a layer of slate-clay, of little thickness in general, and wanting in many places: it corresponds to the height of the river during floods; 5th, sand, with small stones or gravel, from twenty to fifty feet.
  In different parts of the cliff there have been found clay iron-stone, coarsegrained sandstone, iron-stone concretions, nodules of slate-clay and fossil wood. The clay iron-stone occurs in the coarse-grained sandstone, a bed of which of small extent was observed in one place. The nodules are found in a discontinuous but horizontal layer in the stratum of clay; they are compacter lumps of it. Blocks of fossil wood were met with upon the indurated sand, and were thought by Mr. Scott to have fallen from a higher position. They lie upon a ledge of the bank, which, being of firmer texture than the layer of sand above, has better resisted the action of the river encroaching on the banks. Apparently they belonged to an upper and looser portion of the same sandy stratum.
  Mr. Scott likewise found pieces of fossil wood, among shells and other animal exuviae, in a very singular bed of organic remains discovered by him. It is situated under a small hill in the cliff (rising about twenty feet over the general elevation), and lies about seven feet below the level of the highest flood of the river. Both above and beneath it are layers of clay; and it rests upon alternate strata of sand and clay. Their extent is small, being interrupted by beds of uniform sand. The spot may be about a hundred and fifty feet, at the most, above the level of the sea.
Among the organic remains found in this singular assemblage of them, many interesting objects occur. In the examination of them, and of specimens of rocks accompanying, I have been assisted by Mr. Clift and Mr. Webster: and I could not, without the benefit of such aid, have taken upon myself the task, or ventured to pronounce confidently on any part of these curious remains. .
The portion of sand which is found adhering to many of these specimens, and which is no doubt the same with that termed by Mr. Scott yellow sand, has many of the characters of the green sand that is found, in England and France, lying in beds superior to the chalk. An observation no less curious is, that the clay, with which it is here associated, bears a strong general resemblance, in respect of the animal remains which it contains, to the blue clay of the London and Hampshire basins. Among the remains of fishes,—bony palates and the fins of the balistes are common to the Indian clay and to that of Sheppey; and the shells of Cooch-behar bear a strong generic, if not specific, resemblance to the marine formations above the chalk in France and England.
The fact of remains so analogous being found in places so remote and climates so dissimilar, seems not a little important in a geological view.
Remains of aquatic animals, deposited under circumstances in many respects alike, amidst the same strata, ul similar elevations above the height of the present ocean, and manifesting so strong a family resemblance, argue the existence, in the primeval ocean, of like families of animals, diffused through climes where the present races of beings are more dissimilar and limited to a narrower range.
The following enumeration comprises the chief part of the objects found in that deposit which has been laid open in the Caribari Cliffs :—
Sharks' teeth; vertebrae and fin-bone of a shark.
Crocodiles' teeth; vertebra of a crocodile's neck; thigh bone of a crocodile.
  At Harigong, in the district of Caribari, upon the banks of the Brahmputra river, the rocks exhibit granite, quartz rock, and a sandstone or conglomerate of water-worn quartz pebbles with argillaceous cement.
Proceeding inland from the river, in an easterly direction, to Robagiri*, a village of the Garos, distant twenty-five miles, the country consists of hills of sandstone interspersed with blocks, and occasionally larger masses of gneiss, and of a rock composed of felspar and quartz. The beds of the rivulet, north of the village, exhibit white clay; and the hills in that direction are composed of the same clay alternating with white sandstone, in many places containing rounded quartz pebbles, and angular pieces of felspar.
  Further north, at a distance of three or four miles, is a mountain more than four thousand feet above the level of the village. Where the rock shows itself, it appears to consist of quartz and felspar without mica.
  In the bed of the river, at the foot of the village of Robagiri, a stratum of shell limestone is seen above the clay, and is surmounted by another argillaceous bed, which contains shells of a similar character, but in smaller number. In some places the limestone seems to contain bones: but no perfect specimen has been extracted.
  In general the Garo hills may be described as of two orders. The first, rising to the height of two or three thousand feet, and in some places more, are composed of granite with veins of unmixed quartz beneath, and of pure white felspar towards the summits.
The hills of the second order are seldom above 150 or 200 feet in height. They appear to have been formed, from the first, by the operation of water: the strata being nearly horizontal, and their substance composed of clay, sand, and small stones; red in the neighbourhood of red granite, and white where felspar of this colour prevails.
The granitic character of the upper Garo hills is continued into Asham: and the semicircular bend which the Brahm-putra river takes on its entrance into Bengal, is round a granitic promontory of moderate elevation, at the foot of which lies an undulated alluvial country. Among specimens received from thence, ferruginous sandstone and also greenstone occur.
Further east, towards Silhet, at a place named Laour, shell limestone abounds. It consists in a great measure of nummulites. Specimens, which were received thence, with the information that the lime, which Silhet supplies to all Bengal, is procured from inexhaustible beds of that limestone at the Laour hills, are in the Society's collection. The fact merits notice, as it indicates a later formation than transition limestone, for nummulites have not been found in that situation.
Quitting the Brahm-putra and its vicinage, research has been extended westward along the northern frontier of Bengal. The steep banks of rivers present the best and almost the only opportunities of examining the strata: and from two such positions, where good sections are exhibited, specimens have been received.
The Tista, a river which descends from the Bhotan Mountains and traverses North Bengal, is remarkable for a recent, sudden, and great alteration of its course and channel; analogous to changes which may be inferred from actual appearances to bavc taken place at remote periods in other instances, in the same and other rivers. The Tista was visited by Mr. Scott at the place where it issues from the lower range of Bhutan hills. lie has furnished a sketch of the din's, showing the relative positions of the spots whence specimens of the rocks were taken. They consist of sandstone containing much mica, with coal and shale
The Subuk, another river issuing from the Bhotan Mountains, was also visited by Mr. Scott, at the place where it quits the lower hills; and be has furnished a similar sketch of the appearance of the hills as cut by the river. The rock is here quite similar to that which was found composing the banks of the Tista; and likewise consists of sandstone containing mica, with coal and slate clay.
These hills may be considered to be fair samples of the entire range which skirts the north of Hindustan. They rise to no great elevation, and constitute the first step from the plain of India, ascending towards the mountains of Bhotan and the loftier peaks of the Himalaya. Every where, so far as is yet ascertained, the lower range of hills consists of sandstone, and nearly of the same character, abounding in mica.


