INTRODUCTION.
ON publishing in these Transactions, and in the English language, a work which we at first intended for the Geological Society of France, it may perhaps be useful to make known the motives by which we have been guided. For several years the great questions of Biology raised by the study of fossils had called our attention to those deposits which were first formed on the surface of the globe, and we thought there might be found upon this same surface important materials for the history of life, —materials which had hitherto been too much neglected ; we also thought that any general conclusions upon this subject would appear immature before subjecting those beings which were first developed to a more profound examination.
Whilst the same idea had led Mr. Murchison to make the first great step in the zoological classification of the deposits beneath the carboniferous limestone by the establishment of the Silurian and in conjunction with Mr. Sedgwick of the Devonian systems, we were occupied in collecting the fossils which are found in the same beds in France, in Belgium, in the Eifel, and in various parts of Germany. One of us in particular, during several journeys through the Rhenish provinces, had collected numerous materials, having been actively seconded by the modest and learned geologists of these provinces, who, animated by the true love of science (a disposition more usual in Germany than in other countries), are always ready to help those who manifest the desire of forwarding its progress.
We shall particularly mention M. Erbreich, Inspector of Mines at Siegen ; M. Schnur, Professor at Treves; M. Dannenberg, Mining Engineer at Dillenburg; Dr. Hasbach and M. Pongard of Daun ; and we are happy here to offer them our grateful thanks for the assistance we have received from them in connexion with this subject. Without their aid it would have been very difficult for us to have recognized the general laws of classification of these ancient rocks amid the disorder which reigns among them. This useful cooperation had then enabled us to amass a tolerably complete collection of facts relating to the fauna of these deposits, and we had proposed to commence the description of them, when one of us was induced by Mr. Murchison to accompany him to the Rhenish provinces and there examine some of the fossiliferous beds, with the stratigraphical position of which Professor Sedgwick and himself had become familiar.
These gentlemen had already surveyed the Fichtelgebirge, the Hartz, Westphalia, the Eifel, Belgium, &c. ; and, enabled by a long and careful examination of the Silurian and Cambrian deposits in England, to unravel the frequently tangled thread of the true succession of these ancient deposits, they had already compared and placed in the relative positions the greater part of the ancient deposits of Germany, and thus held, as it were, the key to the principal divisions which might be established among them. It was then, that they proposed to us to unite our efforts with theirs, and to accompany the new classification of the Palaeozoic rocks of the Continent with the description of the fossils of these deposits ; a proposition which we could not but accept, and with the greater readiness, since the larger part of our fossils had been collected in the provinces of the right bank of the Rhine, precisely where these gentlemen had found the greatest mass of normal facts suitable to be used as the basis of other approximations. This concurrence of circumstances, already so much in our favour, added still more value to our palaeontological researches, inasmuch as the place assigned to our fossils in the series of beds was much more precise, and in relation with geological divisions deduced from other considerations.	
Such was the object we at first proposed to attain, but which the more profound study of our subject has extended, even to a degree that we had not foreseen. Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison, in order to establish their classification in Western Germany, had commenced from a foundation laid by them in the west of England, and it was by analogies which they discovered in the succession of the deposits in the Rhenish provinces, that they assigned to them, as well as to those of the Eifel and Belgium, the true places in the series. This proceeding, so rational on geological considerations, ought, we conceived, to be followed still more closely in the study of the fossils; and we devoted ourselves to a careful examination of every published work relating to this part of the science, at first in the country itself by de Hiipsch, Blumenbach, Schlotheim, Kloden, Goldfuss, Beyrich, Bronn, and Hermann von Meyer ; then in the West, upon the Eifel, by Steininger; upon Belgium by Morren, Davreux, Dumont, and de Koninck ; upon the various parts of the British Isles by Martin, Fleming, Miller, Sowerby, Phillips, Murchison, Lonsdale, &c. In the East the works of Pusch, Zenke, and Sternberg, also of Count Munster upon the Fichtelgebirge and the environs of Elbersreuth, claimed our particular attention. It was no less necessary to consult those of Wahlenberg, Dalman, Hisinger, and Boek upon the ancient deposits of Scandinavia and its dependent islands; and further still, the writings of de Buch upon Silesia and some parts of the north of Russia, while those of Eichwald, Pander, and Fischer upon various parts of that vast empire, were also to be carefully considered. Lastly, we could not omit the study of the valuable papers published on the older deposits of North America, either in the United States by MM. Green, Conrad, Troost, De Kay, &c., or in England by Dr. Bigsby and Mr. Stokes. If to this already considerable mass of published documents be now added the observations which one of us had collected in several parts of Europe, it will be seen that we were partly in possession of the elements of a general work on the palceontology of the ancient formations.
Once engaged in this course, we had only to complete our researches by a comparative examination of what had already been done, not only in Europe but also in North America, where the deposits of this age are developed upon a scale of much greater vastness; and lastly, we were to add to all this such positive information as is found in various scientific Transactions, or given by various travellers upon other parts of the globe. After having eliminated the frequent repetitions in the genera, and particularly of species, by comparison of the descriptions and figures given by authors, as well as by that of the numerous specimens which one of us has collected, we have obtained results from this first general sifting which we have thought it might be useful to make known on this occasion, at least in a summary manner. Surrounded by all these hitherto scattered and consequently ill appreciated riches, we have thought it requisite to pause, and take a retrospective glance in order to verify the course taken by science within ten years, and to expose rapidly its progress and its present condition before continuing our march.
We had therefore a twofold reason for placing this summary at the head of our memoir, and making it form the first part. In the second we have described the greater portion of those fossils of the ancient deposits of the right bank of the Rhine which were still undescribed or imperfectly known, and to them we have added some species from the Eifel. We have endeavoured to be simple, clear and precise in our descriptions, but we have omitted nothing which was necessary either to characterize the species or to distinguish them from their cognate species. That which zoologically constitutes a species is not sufficiently defined to allow us to limit our remarks to the enumeration of a few isolated characters ; it is necessary to express all of them, because it is from the whole taken together that the species results; and this method is the more necessary for the fossils of the ancient beds, because they are rarely found complete in all parts. If it be observed that many authors have described and figured very incomplete organized remains, of which they neither knew the dimensions nor all the characters, the necessity of being more severe in labours of this sort will be felt, in order to avoid encumbering the science with a multitude of names which really recal to the mind nothing more than objects without form or interest.
We have already stated, that the object of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison’s memoir is to give a detailed account of the proofs in Western Germany and in the neighbouring countries of the equivalents of the Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous systems which are so finely developed in England, and particularly the beds representing the Devonian system ; for the other two were already well known, although not distinctly limited. The journeys performed by one of us with Mr. Murchison in various parts of Russia subsequent to the first construction of our tables have afforded us the means of so materially improving them, and of enlarging our general views, that with the approbation of that author we have interpolated some of the chief results of the Russian expeditions in the following pages ; thus anticipating in some degree what will hereafter be brought before the public in a separate work by Mr. Murchison, M. de Verneuil and Count A. Keyserling. This table, which forms the third part of our memoir, is extracted from the ‘Species general de la Faune des Terrains Anciens, which we are at present occupied in completing. To each species we have added a synonymy, which, although not fully extended, will always suffice to remove all uncertainty about it. We have also carefully avoided citing any localities unsupported by our own observations or by undoubted authorities, and we have been equally careful in referring each species to its proper bed, whether exclusively belonging to the Devonian system, or whether represented at the same time in one of the other two systems, or in all three at once.
PART I.
A General Survey of the Fauna of the Paleozoic Rocks.
When the development of organized beings in each formation or great system of rocks is studied on a sufficiently extended scale, changes more or less distinct may be observed as the inquirer proceeds in certain directions ; and these changes are equally evident whether the system be considered in the direction of its vertical dimensions, that is, in the order of the successive beds, or in the direction of its horizontal or geographic extent. In the latter case the modifications presented by the fauna of the system are comparable to what may be observed at the present time, not only as regards animals which live in different latitudes, but also as regards those which are found upon continents or in seas more or less distant, but placed under the same parallel. Already "one of us has endeavoured to discover the law, cateris paribus, according to which these various changes were effected in the tertiary and secondary deposits, and the details into which we shall enter upon the animal organization of the ancient beds, tend to confirm that law relating to the distribution and the modifications which species undergo in the same system of deposits.
Mr. J. Phillips thinks that the Testaceous Mollusks preceded the Polyparia ; but it may be remarked that limestones are rare in the oldest beds, which are almost always formed of slates, grauwacke, or quartzite, then in a state of more or less argillaceous mud and of more or less impure sand, sometimes fine, sometimes coarse, constituting an unfavourable foundation for the stony Polyparia; but this does not follow in relation to the naked, the gelatinous, the phytoid or corneous Polyparia, or even other more elevated beings, such as the Medusaria, which may have existed before. If the waters of this first period contained very little carbonate of lime, and if this cause have also contributed with the preceding to the rarity of the stony Polyparia, it must also have had some influence over the Testacea. These latter also would only have appeared when circumstances had become more favourable, and they might have been preceded by a great quantity of soft animals, such as the Actinice-, an hypothesis which would moreover be confirmed by the bituminous matter contained in many rocks in which we do not find any organic remains. As to the silex, it does not appear to have been found in these waters in a favourable state for the existence of sponges, which are rare in these ancient deposits comparatively with what are observed in the secondary periods.
The first seas have been said to have been but of small depth, and that the temperature, being more uniform than it is now, there resulted a greater uniformity, both organic and inorganic, in the character of the deposits ; and it is added, that it is only in consequence of the upraising of the beds that the asperities of the globe’s surface became more distinct, the seas deeper, external circumstances more varied, and animalization also more diversified. If the mineral characters of the ancient rocks were more similar to each other than those of the following periods, it may be attributed to the circumstance, that all the primary sediments resulted from the alteration and decomposition of crystallized rocks differing very slightly in their elementary composition. As to the greater uniformity of the organized beings, it will appear much less decided than it has long been thought, if, as we are about to do, the animals of each great class be considered successively. And lastly, the slight depth of the seas, deduced, according to Conrad’s notion, from the absence of Cephalopods with an involute shell, is on the other hand contradicted by the presence of gigantic Cephalopods with a straight and very fragile shell, which could only live in the great ocean and in very deep waters.
The French translation of the Manual of Geology by Mr. De la Beebe, which appeared in 1833, contains lists of fossils which at that time were considered rather extensive. These lists comprehend 589 species, distributed in the coal-measures (properly so called), in the carboniferous limestone, and in the grauwacke group. At present, the same series of beds, constituting the Carboniferous, the Devonian, and the Silurian systems, present, after deducting the repetitions, 2698 species of animals, belonging to 326 genera, distributed into classes and in each system according to the following table. It is necessary, however, to inform the reader, that in the number of species given in the table there are not included, for want of description, or sufficiently accurate figures, 1st, the species determined by M. Hce- ninghaus and noticed in the French translation of Mr. De la Beche’s Manuel; 2nd, those mentioned by M. Eichwald in his memoir on the Silurian System of Esthonia ; 3rd, those alluded to by M. Sandeberg de Weilburg, in a letter addressed to M. Bronn, and inserted in the ‘ Neue Jahrbuch fiir Mineralogie,’ &c. We have also not taken into consideration the distribution of fossil species in the older formations of the south of Ireland, as indicated by Mr. Weaver, because there appears to be some uncertainty about the true geological position of several of these fossiliferous strata. Lastly, the beautiful work of M. de Koninck not having begun to be published till after the completion of our table, we have been able to avail ourselves of only a manuscript list which he had the politeness to give us in April 1841.
The numbers that we have given for the genera and species in this class will be augmented when the discoveries made by Dr. Malcolmson in Scotland, Mr. Asmus in Livonia, Courland, &c., shall Save been published.
The species in this column may probably at some future time be united to those of the next, since it may be supposed that they might have lived during the Devonian period, in the beds of which future researches will not fail to discover them.
The greater number of species in this column are from North America.
In the above recapitulation of Palaeozoic species we necessarily depend in many instances upon the names and descriptions of foreign authors. Not having had it in our power to compare all the original forms, we conceive that, though by the deduction of several names which we have ascertained to have been applied to the same shell in distant countries, the numerical aggregate may be diminished for the present, yet the amount will doubtless be more than sustained by future discoveries.
We will now take a general survey of these several classes successively, commencing with the more simple and ascending to the more complicated beings. We shall point out the principal genera which they contain, their predominance in any one of the systems or in any country, and we shall follow, so to speak, their distribution over the surface of the globe during these three great periods, which commence with the first traces of life and end with the Magnesian Limestone of England (the Zechstein of Germany, or Permian system of Russia). See letter of Mr. Murchison, Phil. Mag.
In presenting this abridged Table of our present knowledge, we do not forget that researches will produce some changes in our numbers, and may modify the relations which we have established; but this is the necessary consequence of the progress of science, and we shall only rejoice at it: as the errors of determination must be proportioned to the number of species, the results will not be sensibly altered by them.
General Remarks on the several Classes.
Incertm Sedes.—The remains of organic origin, the characters of which, far removed from those of all known types, do not permit us to assign them their proper place in the series, must naturally belong to the most ancient beds, and, in 'fact, it is in the older slaty schists of Carmarthenshire that the serpuliform bodies, regarded by MacLeay as sea-worms, and to which Mr. Murchison has given the names of Nereites, Myrianites, and Nemertites, are found. The Polymeres Demetarum of the same author belongs to the Llandeilo beds. The Graptolites or Prionotus (of which fifteen species have been pointed out, undoubtedly too many, as Dr. Beck thinks) belong to the Silurian system, both in Europe and in North as well as South America, and the greatest number of them are peculiar to the lower beds of the system. It is probable that the Annulites which Mr. MacClelland found in India in the mountain district between Lohooghat and Almorah, in the province of Kemaon, belong also to the most ancient depositsf. As to the Tentaculites, they ascend through all the Silurian beds, and penetrate even into the Devonian limestone of the Eifel and their equivalents, both in Europe and in North America. One species has been pointed out in the south of Africa. The Cophinus and Spongiarium belong to the Ludlow beds ; and lastly, the Receptaculites Neptuni, Defr.J (Ischadites Konigii, Murch.), which is also found in the Ludlow beds, may likewise be seen in the Silurian slates and the Devonian limestones of Belgium and the Eifel, as well as the Pleurodyctium problematicum of Goldfuss.
Infusoria.—Numerous remains which evidently belonged to animals of this class have been recognized by M. Ehrenberg in the silex of the carboniferous formation collected by M. Helmersen upon the banks of the Volga in the vicinity of Twer. This very recent observation, not yet published, confirms our views relative to the development of organized beings on the surface of the globe.
Polyparia.—We are not aware of the existence of any naked Polyparia in the oldest beds. Of Corallines, the Cellaria and the Sertularia appear very rarely, whether the traces of them have disappeared, or whether these animals were actually few in number. The Spongiaria, as well as the reticulated Polyparia, are hut little spread in them comparatively with the stony Zoophytes. Among these latter we shall mention the Stromatopora, of which one species in particular, the Sir. concentrica, Gold, is very abundant in the Silurian and Devonian deposits in England, in the Eifel, and in the Rhenish provinces ; also on both sides of the Ural, and in the state of Tennessee in North Americaf. The Reteporce were particularly developed during the Carboniferous period; but the species from which the genus Fenestella has been formed, are more numerous in the Dudley and Wenlock beds than in their equivalents of Gottland and Esthonia. Two of these species pass into the Devonian system. The Gorgonice are not uncommon in the Palaeozoic rocks. One of them, the G. ripisteria, Goldf., appears to have lived during the three periods. The Lithodendron is more particularly seen in the last of them; the Cystiphyllum in the two first in England, and in the Devonian system in Belgium and in the Eifel.
The great genus Cyathophyllum, such as it is established by Goldfuss, is one of the most important, as well on account of the number of species as for their profusion in all the periods, and the presence of some of them in the most distant countries. Nine species are Silurian, seventeen are Devonian, and eight are Carboniferous ; and six are common to the two first systems.
It is particularly in the Devonian rocks upon the banks of the Rhine and in the Eifel that this genus is most extended. It is also very plentiful in the Silurian rocks of Scandinavia, and in North America upon the banks of Lake Huron, likewise in the states of Ohio, New York and Tennessee. It is to be observed that this genus is a dismemberment from the true Astrea, which, with the Meandrince and the Caryophyllcece, form at the present day the coral reefs and islands of intertropical oceans. Among the Strombodes, a genus consisting but of few species, the S. vermicularis of Lonsdale (Cyathophyllum of Goldfuss), is common to the two older systems. Caninia-f, a genus containing few species, is at present peculiar to the Carboniferous system. The Cateniporce (with a single exception, which is even doubtful) characterize the lowest system in Russia, in Scandinavia, on the banks of the Rhine, and in England, as well as in North America: the Syringoporae, on the other hand, are pretty equally disseminated ; two species are common to the Silurian and Devonian systems, and one, the S. reticulata, Goldf., common to Europe and America, is found in all the systems. In Russia this genus particularly characterizes the Carboniferous period.
The Favosites, including the Calamopora of M. Goldfuss, are not less important than the Cyathophylla, although the number of species be less: sixteen are distributed in the Silurian beds in England, in Germany, upon the banks of the Rhine, in Scandinavia, Esthonia, and Ingria, or the district to the south of St. Petersburg; as well as in North America in almost all those places where the oldest deposits are developed, that is, throughout an extent of nearly 1400 miles from east to west, from the Alleghany chain to Engineer Cantonment upon the Missouri, and of 2400 miles from north to south, or from the shores of the Arctic Ocean and the great lakes to the very centre of Alabama. Of the sixteen species, the six most abundant over these immense surfaces, i. e. the Favosites or Calamopora alveolaris, Gothlandica, polymorpha, Spongites, basaltica, and fibrosa (of which one, the F. Gothlandica, occurs in New Holland), continue to be found in the Devonian system, in which they are not less constant in England, in the north of France, in Belgium, in the Eifel, upon the banks of the Rhine, and in Russia. A single species appears to be peculiar to that system, and seven are peculiar to the Carboniferous period.
The Auloporee are plentiful in the Silurian and Devonian beds, which they do not go beyond ; and of five species four are common to these two systems ; and lastly, the Alveolites and the Favosites, genera very much reduced according to the latest works, are represented in the three systems.
When taken collectively, the Polyparia are nearly similarly developed in the Silurian and Devonian systems, and thirty-six species are common to them. This, amounting to about a third of the species in each, is much more considerable than for any other class ; for the Brachiopoda, which, next to the Polyparia, contain the greatest number of species common to both beds, have only one-seventh. In the Carboniferous system, in which the calcareous rocks are nevertheless very extensive, rather more than a sixth less are found than in the two preceding, and four only are common to the Devonian system. Lastly, there are three species only found in all the three periods,
Foraminifera.—The Foraminif era of the Palaeozoic formations have as yet been very little studied, and we are well acquainted only with those which have been pointed out by M. Fischer in the carboniferous limestone of the government of Wladimir and the heights of Samara on the Volga, in which escarpments more than two hundred feet thick are entirely composed of them. Mr. Phillips mentions remains of this class in the Devonian limestone of Cannington Park in North Devon, but without detailing their characters or the number of genera and species. It is moreover very probable that further researches will make us acquainted with a greater number of Palaeozoic Foraminifera, analogous to those found in the secondary, tertiary and modern formations, wherever circumstances may have been favourable to their preservation.
Radiata.—The remains of animals of this class almost all belong to the great family of Crinoidea. The Asterias are very rare, and of Echinodermata four Cida- rites alone are quoted in the Carboniferous system, in Irelandf, Scotland}, England §, Belgium || and Russia ^[, and some fragments have been pointed out in the Devonian system. Our attention will not be particularly arrested by many genera of Crinoidea, which contain only two or three species, and of which the greater part have not been noticed except in a single locality, whether Silurian, Devonian, or Carboniferous; but we will pass on to the most important genera.
The Cupresso crinites, scarcely more than one excepted, are Devonian, from the Eifel and the right bank of the Rhine. The Pentremites, of which fourteen species are known, are, on the other hand, almost all Carboniferous. It is nevertheless worthy of remark, that six species are stated by Dr. Troost to be associated with Calceola, Calymene, Terebratula Wilsoni, &c., in Ohio and Tennessee, in beds probably older than the mountain limestone. In Europe a single species is mentioned at Brushford, in North Devon, in the Devonian bedsff ; and it ascends into the carboniferous limestone (Ratingen), in which formation the genus attained its fullest development. The Po t erio crinit es are all from the Carboniferous series, and are found in Yorkshire, in the neighbourhood of Bristol, and in Tournay. The Platy- crinites, of which nine are Devonian, fifteen Carboniferous, and three common to both systems, are found particularly in the mountain limestone of England and Belgium, and in the limestones of Devonshire and the Eifel. The twenty-three species of Actinocrinites are, on the contrary, equally disseminated in the three systems, and are met with in England, in the Eifel, upon the banks of the Rhine, and in Sweden. Three are Devonian and Carboniferous, and one is quoted from the province of Bolivia. The Cy at ho crinit es have nearly the same geological distribution : of the twenty-seven species known to us, nine are Silurian, from England, Scandinavia and the adjacent islands; ten are Devonian, from the south-west of England, from the Eifel, and from Elbersreuth ; and lastly, fourteen are Carboniferous, from England, Belgium, and the beds of the same age in the centre and south of Russia. Two species, the C. pinnatus, Goldf., and C. rugosus, Miller, are common to the three systems. The Melocrinites of Goldfuss (one only excepted from the mountain limestone of Stolberg) are all Devonian, from the Eifel ; and the same may be said of the Rhodocrinites, one of which (R. verus) is quoted by Goldfuss in the Eifel (Petref.), and by de Buch in the Devonian beds of Russia (Beitrage Russl. p. 62).
On recapitulation we observe that the species of Crinoidea increase from the lower toward the upper series in the proportion of 42 : 59 : 75. There is only one species common to the two lower systems, while on the other hand ten belong to both the Devonian and Carboniferous systems, a circumstance exactly the reverse of what we have remarked of the Polyparia.
Annelida.—This class of animals appears to have been but very slightly developed during the older periods, if we may judge by the paucity of their remains ; possibly the erratic species and those which live in sand may have existed in great numbers without having left any traces, while only those which secreted calcareous coverings, as the Serpula, though perhaps not more abundant, have been preserved to the present age. Four species of Serpulce are pointed out in the Silurian systemf, six occur in the Devonian, and two in the Carboniferous.
VII a. Conchifera dimyaria.—The great difficulty of becoming well acquainted with the inside of bivalve shells, such as the hinge, the muscular impressions and the palleal impression, wdiich are so rarely well preserved in the deposits with which we are occupied, should induce caution in admitting the generic approximations and decisions that have hitherto been made ; nevertheless we have been led to adopt the denominations which have been assigned to them by authors in consequence of the impossibility of verifying the generic characters and the specific distinctions of a great number of these shells.
The shells of the Tubicola appear to be completely wanting in the Palaeozoic formations. The Pholadaria, the Solenacea, the Myari/e, the Mactracece, and the Cor- bulacea, are very seldom represented. Among the Nymphacea the Sanguinolarice are the most plentiful, particularly in the Devonian system, in which there are sixteen species, found in the limestones of the Eifel and of Elbersreuth. Two of these are found in the lower system, and the grauwacke of the Rhenish provinces contains five. Ten are Carboniferous, the greater part from England, and some of these reappear at Peretki in the Valdai and in the government of Kaluga. The San- guinolaria angustata, Phil., and £. sulcata, Miinst., are common to the whole series. Of seven Lucina five are Devonian and from the Eifel, and the remaining genera of this family are unimportant. A single Cyclas is mentioned in the freshwater limestone, subordinate to the coal-beds of Westbury in Staffordshire. (Silur. Syst., p. 84.) The Veneres are Carboniferous, and the Pullastra Devonian; they are only mentioned as found in England and Belgium.
The family of Cardiacea increased greatly during the long accumulation of Palaeozoic sediments. The numerous forms of the shells of this family were then extremely varied, as they were during the secondary and tertiary periods, and as they are in the present seas. We shall see as we proceed, that in general those genera which have been capable of resisting all the revolutions of the globe, and which from the commencement showed this tendency to an almost infinite variety of form, but have preserved certain characters which bring them near to the primitive type, have not ceased to exhibit the same polymorphism even to the present time.
Several divisions have recently been established in the genus Cardium of the older beds, which we adopt as subgenera'. The Cardiomorpha are Carboniferous and from Belgium; the Lunulacardiaf are Devonian, from Elbersreuth and the Fichtelgebirge ; the Cardiola, one only excepted, are also Devonian, and from the Clymenia limestone of Elbersreuth ; the Pleurorhynchi§ or Conocardia (a subdivision in which we only leave the new species]) are of little importance. The genus Cardium, as we now keep it, still includes fifty-three species : the Silurian beds contain five which are of slight interest, but one of which passes into the Devonian system ; forty-four are from the Clymenia and Orthoceratite limestone of Elbersreuth and the corresponding beds of the banks of the Rhine. The C. palmatum, Goldf., is the most common of these species in Westphalia, the Duchy of Nassau, the country of Waldeck, the Fichtelgebirge, and it is also found in Nova Zembla. In the upper  system there are seven species, of which one, the C. aliforme, Sow., is common to the preceding system, and is found in Ireland, England, Belgium, and at Elbers- reuth. Lastly, Isocardia and Cypricardia also appear occasionally in the several systems. We must further observe, that the greater part of the Cardiacea of these ancient seas are of much smaller dimensions than in those of the following periods, in which the species attained (like the greater part of the Acephali) larger and larger dimensions without presenting on that account less varied forms.
There is nothing very particular about the Nucula of this epoch : there are twelve species in the inferior system, mostly in the Silurian grauwacke of the banks of the Rhine, several in England, and others are found in Scania in diluvium; seven are from the Devonian limestones of the Eifel and Elbersreuth, and fifteen from the mountain limestone of Ireland, England, and Belgium. The Cucullaa are particularly found in the Devonian beds of the south-west of England, and one of them occurs in the Silurian rocks of the Cedar Mountain in the south of Africa. The Area, of which one only has been pointed out in the Silurian system, afford three species to the middle system in the Eifel, at Paffrath and at Elbersreuth, and thirteen to the carboniferous limestone of Derbyshire, Belgium, Silesia, and the north of Russia.
The Megalodontes are peculiarly Devonian; and one species, the M. cucullatus, Sow., is characteristic of this system in the south-west of England, as well as upon the right bank of the Rhine. The Modiola and Mytili, rare in the Silurian system, are more abundant in the beds which surmount it. These shells are frequent enough in the Orthoceratite and Clymenia limestones of Elbersreuth, as well as in the mountain limestone of England, Belgium, Ratingen, Silesia, and Russia. Two Anodontes are mentioned by M. Eichwald as found in the carboniferous limestone of the coal region of Donetzf; and of twenty-two species of Unio, twenty-one belong to the coal-measures of England and Scotland, and of the environs of Li&ge and Werden.
Thus it will be seen that the Conchifera dimyaria are irregularly disseminated in the three systems, in which the species of each system are represented in an ascending series by the numbers 49, 145, and 126 ; and of these species nine are Silurian and Devonian, and five are Devonian and Carboniferous.
VII b. Conchifera monomyaria.—The Acephala monomyaria present only a small number of genera in the seas which precede the deposit of the upper new red sandstone or Trias. Count Munster enumerates nine species of Inoceramus from the limestones of Elbersreuth and the Fichtelgebirge. One of them, the In. vetustus, Sow.J, is found also in the mountain limestone of Yorkshire, Belgium, and in the Devonian beds of the banks of the Rhine. The Pterinaa, widely disseminated during the Silurian epoch, particularly in the grauwacke of the Rhenish province and in the state of New York, become rarer in the beds of the middle period in Devonshire and the Eifel. Two species of this epoch are common to the preceding system, and five are reckoned in the Carboniferous period in Belgium and at Ratingen. The Avicula, on the contrary, increase from below upwards. Seven are mentioned in the lowest system in England, in the north of France, in the grauwacke of the banks of the Rhine, and in the Eifel, and also in Scandinavia. One of the most frequent, the A. reticulata, His., passes into the middle system: twenty-three belong to these last-mentioned beds, from Devonshire, the Eifel, Elbers- reuth and the Fichtelgebirge ; and twenty-four to the upper system of Yorkshire, Belgium, the banks of the Rhine, and Silesia. The Posidonia, whose generic characters are still so ill-defined, are found lower down in the series in North America than in Europe, where they begin to appear only in the Devonian system of Elbers- reuth. They are particularly abundant in the culm-measures of Devonshire, and in the carboniferous slates of the banks of the Rhine. The P. Becheri, Bronnf, is the most common of these latter.
The increase in number of species from the lower to the upper beds is still more decided in the Pectines than in the Avicula, for only tw‘o are known in the Silurian, even if the grauwacke of Glatz in Silesia does really belong to the first system ; but fourteen species are found in Devonshire, the Rhenish provinces, and the Volkof; and thirty-two in the Carboniferous system of the north and west of England, in that of Belgium, the banks of the Rhine, Silesia, the Valdai hills and Vitegra in Russia, and even in the province of Bolivia in the centre of South AmericaJ.
Thus four genera alone had acquired any importance during this long series of deposits, and we much doubt if the family of the Ostracea, as well as the great genera Lima and Spondylus, which, setting off from the Muschelkalk, have been increasingly developed until the present time, had any real representatives in the ancient seas before the Zechstein epoch. It is in limestones above the true Carboniferous system, but yet containing Producti and Spiriferi, that one of us has this year discovered an Ostrea near Arzamas, in Russia §. As to the numerically specific increase of the Conchifera monomyaria in the three systems, it is represented by the numbers 33, 60, and 77; of these, three species are common to the first and second system, and five to the second and third.
The true Producti, which we distinguish from those Brachiopoda provisionally retained by us under the name of Leptana, do not appear to have existed during the Silurian period, either in Europe or in other parts of the globe. Of four species noted in the Devonian system, and found in the south-west of England, in the north of France, in the Eifel, at Refrath, and in Russia, three are common to the Carboniferous system. The Pr. subaculeatus, Murch., is the most constant in the middle system of the north of France, of Belgium, and of the Eifel, and it extends even into the northern and central parts of Russia.
This genus, on the contrary, increased so greatly, both in number of species and in dimensions, during the Carboniferous epoch, that it might alone, so to speak, be taken to characterize it; the Productus Martini, P. antiquatus, P. comoides, P. lobatus, P. giganteus, and P. punctatus, of Sowerby, are profusely disseminated not only through the Carboniferous system in Ireland, Scotland, the north and west of England, in France and Belgium, and on the banks of the Rhine, but also in the basins of northern, middle and southern Russia, upon both flanks of the Ural, and lastly, most of them are found in the carboniferous rocks of North America f. Of seventy-two species of Productus of this period, the greater number are found in the mountain limestone of Yorkshire, Derbyshire, the province of Liege, at Ra- tingen, and in the north of Russia; but we must also remark, that they do not cease to be observed even in the beds of the coal-measures, as we know that they occur in them at Coalbrook Dale, or in those districts in which the mountain limestone no longer forms a distinct platform at the base of the Carboniferous system, hut where it is confounded with other coal-measures, as at Sable (France), in the north and south of Russia, and in North America. In the province of Bolivia, M. Alcide d’Orbigny has pointed out nine species of Productus, and he has shown that the Calcaire d Producte is blended with the coal-measures. The genus is still to be seen above the coal-measures, but disappears after the magnesian limestone or the zechstein, and the corresponding beds in the governments of Archangel, Vologda, Perm and Orenbourg.
The Leptcence, among which we comprehend the greater part of the Strophomence, present, according to our views, characters which place them naturally between the Producti and the Orthides; but as relates to their distribution among the three systems, it is analogous to that of the species of this latter genus, for there are twenty- two Silurian, ten Devonian, and four Carboniferous. The Silurian species, among which we may particularly distinguish the L. sericea (Sow. Sil. Syst.) as one that is found in the most distant countries, are principally from the border counties of England and Wales, and from the grauwacke of the banks of the Rhine. Some are found in Scandinavia and in the dependent isles, also in the state of New Yorkf. The Leptcena sarcinulata (L. lata of M. de Bucli), the most common species in Europe, and which passes into the Carboniferous system, has been mentioned, but with a doubt, as occurring in the south of Africa Of ten Devonian species, one, the L. analoga, Phill., is also found in the superior system; it is one of the most common not only in England but in Belgium, and in the states of Ohio and New York.
The genus Orthis §, which is much more numerous than the genus Leptcena, follows, in its vertical distribution, a precisely analogous ratio of decrease. Sixty-four species are Silurian, thirty-five Devonian, and fifteen Carboniferous. Nine species, common to the first two systems, serve to denote an intimate connexion between them, such as the Polyparia have already demonstrated. The 0. Callactis is the most exclusively Silurian species, and is found in England, in Scandinavia, in Russia, in the state of New York, and in the south of Africa. The 0. lunata (Sow. in Sil. Syst.), and 0. testudinaria, Dalm., which also pass upwards into the Devonian system, are frequent in various parts of Europe and North America. 
The species peculiar to the middle system have very seldom been found identical in many distant regions, and the same may be observed in regard to those of the superior or Carboniferous system. The 0. Umbraculum, as it is defined by M. de Buch, seems to bind together the Devonian and Carboniferous systems in several parts of Europe, and the 0. rugosa (Leptcena, Dalm.) the two inferior systems on this side of the Atlantic, as well as on the other, where it is found in the Catskill Mountains, in the beds of Trenton Falls, and in Pennsylvania.
The species for which we have provisionally retained the generic names of Del- thyris and Cyrtia are all Silurian, and from Scandinavia and the state of New York.
The Spiriferi present, so to speak, an intermediate distribution between that of the Producti, the number of which increases very rapidly in the superior system, and the Terebratulce, the species of which are almost equally disseminated in the three systems. In the same manner, the Spiriferi increase from below upwards, but follow a much less rapid progression than that of the Producti, being represented by the numbers 29, 50 and 74. There are but few species exclusively Silurian, which are found throughout a certain extent of country, and consequently may be regarded as really characteristic of the inferior system. In the middle system we find the S. heteroclites (de Buch) in Devonshire and on the right bank of the Rhine ; the S. speciosus (Schlot.) in Devonshire, Belgium, the Eifel, Russia, the Ural, and in the Cedar Mountains north of the Cape of Good Hope; the Sp. Verneuilli (Murchison f) in the Bas Boulonnois, Belgium, Voroneje in Central Russia, and as far as Smeinogorsk and Berosowa in the Altai. The species exclusively Carboniferous are very numerous in the mountain limestone of England and Belgium, and a few of them extend to the several basins of Russia, where they occur with other peculiar species, and M. d’Orbigny has found some of them in beds of the same age in South America. The Spiriferi of the Carboniferous system are in general distinguished by their less numerous, wider and more rounded, and frequently dichotomous plaits. The species also attain greater dimensions, are more commonly globular or rounded in form, and are generally smoother than in the older formations. Among the Spiriferi common to two systems, we may mention, as being both Silurian and Devonian, the Sp. trapezoidalis (Cyrtia, Dalm.), which is found in England, in Belgium, upon the banks of the Rhine, in Scandinavia, and in the north of Russia; and the Sp. macropterus (Goldf.), from the Eifel, the Rhenish provinces, Russia, Kunawur in the Himalaya J, the Cedar Mountains in the south of Africa, the state of Ohio, and the lower Silurian beds of the state of New York. The latter is the only species that has been hitherto met with in the four quarters of the globe. Among the ten Devonian and Carboniferous species, we may notice the Sp. oblata (Sow.), as being found in Ireland, England, Belgium, the Eifel, and as occurring in Van Diemen’s Land; likewise the Sp. glaber, Sow., over all Western Europe and in the state of Ohio. The three species which are met with throughout the entire series of ancient deposits are, the Sp. octoplicatus, Sow., the Sp. crispus, Dalm., and the Sp. striatulus, Schlot., but the S. striatulus is extremely rare.
The Pentameri are hitherto exclusively Silurian. This genus is largely represented in the Ural chain, and species different from those of Europe are distributed from Bogoslofsk in the north to Bielozeskoi in the south. 
The Strygocephali, on the contrary, are peculiar to the Devonian system, and the S. Burtini (Bronn) is very characteristic of its beds on the right bank of the Rhine and in Devonshire. These shells appear to be very rare in the strata of the same age so highly developed in Russia, for we have found only a single individual in the Ural.
We have retained provisionally the name of Atrypa for those shells which have not yet been placed in any other genera, but it must be acknowledged that this group is not zoologically well characterized, and that its distribution in the three systems is but of minor interest: twenty-six Silurian species occur in England and Scandinavia ; twenty-one Devonian are found in the south-west of England, as well as eight which belong to the Carboniferous system.
The Terebratula, as we have already mentioned, are almost equally distributed through the three systems in Europe ; there are fifty Silurian, forty-nine Devonian, and forty-four Carboniferous. This near equality of distribution is maintained in relation to such of them as are common to two systems, for there are thirteen which are both Silurian and Devonian, and ten Devonian and Carboniferous. The greater part of the Terebratulce peculiar to the Silurian system are from the border counties of England and Wales, as well as from Scandinavia, and some are found in Esthonia, Ingria, south of St. Petersburg, and in the province of Bolivia. Conrad does not admit the existence of a single true Terebratula in the Silurian system in the United States; but we must remark, that this zoologist cites shells under the name of Atrypa, which, in our opinion, are true Terebratula, and which have in general been regarded as such down to the present time.
In the middle system the Terebratula abound, particularly in Devonshire and in the Eifel, on the right bank of the Rhine, and in the limestones of Elbersreuth. Among the species peculiar to this system, the T. ferita, and the T. concentrica of de Buch, are very characteristic in Devonshire, the Bas Boulonnais, the Cotentin, Belgium, the Eifel, the environs of Cologne and Russia: one of the most interesting in Russia is the T. Meyendorjii, nob., which is very abundant on the banks of the river Volkof and in the government of Psko; it is also found near the source of the Vitchedga, not far from the northern Ural. Those which belong both to the Silurian and Devonian systems are found over a much more considerable space; thus the T. Wilsoni, Sow., of England, is to be met with also in Belgium, in Russia, in the island of Gottland, and in the states of Ohio and Tennessee. The T.prisca and T. aspera, Schlot., are found in England, in the north of France, in Belgium, in the Eifel, upon the banks of the Rhine, in Scandinavia and the islands of the Baltic, also in Livonia, Esthonia, Ingria, the Uralian chain, on the banks of the Thracian Bosphorus, near Smeinogorsk on the north side of the Altai; in America in the states of Tennessee, Ohio and Pennsylvania; and, finally, in the slaty clays of Moscow (New York) and on the banks of Lake Erie.
The superior or Carboniferous system in Ireland, Yorkshire, Derbyshire and the west of England, encloses a vast number of Terebratulce, as well as the mountain limestone of Hainault and of the provinces of Li&ge and Namur. They are not so numerous in the carboniferous beds of the north and south of Russia. The species peculiar to this system are not in general extensively distributed; those which are common to it and to the middle system have, on the contrary, been collected very far apart; thus the Terebratula hastata (Sow.), from Ireland, England, and Belgium, has been found in Russia and as far as the Altai chain; the T. acuminata, Sow., is common to both systems in England and in Belgium; and lastly, the T. Pleurodon, Phill., occurs not only throughout Western Europe, but also in Silesia, Livonia, and the Valdai near Smeinogorsk in Asia. It is not certain that any species traverses the entire series of Palaeozoic rocks.
If it were sought to establish any general difference of character in the Terehratulce of the three systems, it might perhaps appear that the striated or very finely plicated species with sharp folds prevail in the Silurian; that in the Devonian these characters have a tendency to become less strongly marked, and that the species with cross striae and with a rugose surface, in consequence of the decussation of these striae by longitudinal folds, become more abundant; and, lastly, that the Carboniferous species have their folds larger and less numerous, and that the shells are more frequently smooth and even, and that, like the Producti and Spiriferi, they attain dimensions much more considerable.
The genus Ungulites of Pander (Obolus, Eichw.) is known to be plentiful in some Lower Silurian grits in the neighbourhood of St. Petersburg, but it does not extend to the west of Revel. Two Crania are mentioned in the Eifel, and one species is not rare in the Silurian beds of the neighbourhood of St. Petersburg and along the shores of the Baltic in Esthonia. The Lingulce and Orbiculce, often but indistinctly characterized, have been found in the several systems, but no species appears to pass from one to another. Lastly, the Calceola sandalina, Lam., which fairly peculiarises the Devonian period in the west of England, Belgium, the Eifel and the right bank of the Rhine, has also been noticed in the states of Tennessee and Ohio.
If we reflect for a moment upon the four principal divisions of the great family of the Terebratulce, that is, the Producti, the Orthides, the Spiriferi and the Terebratulce proper, all the others being capable of combining with these, we shall perceive that their proportions and their mode of distribution in the three systems being known, one might, by deduction from such knowledge, judge a, priori what would be their relative development in succeeding periods. Thus the Producti, which are so suddenly and copiously displayed in the Carboniferous system, would not, it might be inferred, at once disappear in the next overlying deposits, nor survive long after the exceptional circumstances which had caused so rapid an extension; and, in fact, they disappear above the zechstein and the contemporaneous beds both in Western and Eastern Europe. The Orthides, although decreasing upwards, had still sufficient representatives in the superior system to survive the epoch of the coal-measures; and one species, 0. Laspii, Buch, lived during the epoch of the zechstein, being found in that formation at Ropsen, near Gera. The Spiriferi, on the contrary, increasing slowly upwards, ought to have survived both the Producti and the Orthides, and they are found even to the upper parts of the lias. Lastly, the Terebratulce, which maintained a nearly equal proportion during the whole of the great series of Palaeozoic rocks, uninfluenced by the changes which took place in the ancient seas, ought to have long outlived all the other genera ; and we observe, in fact, that they have so resisted all the revolutions of which our globe has been the theatre, that they abounded in profusion at all periods, and that they are numerous in the present seas: but by a singular anomaly we do not know any species of Terebratula which lived during the three Palaeozoic epochs.
It has been seen by the details which we have given of the species common to two systems, that those which have been found most extensively in a vertical direction, or which have the greatest range in the successive deposits, are generally those which have the most extended geographical distribution, and have been met with at the greatest number of places and at very considerable distances; and indeed it may easily be conceived that the species whose organization enabled them to live through several consecutive periods, would at the same time be those which could exist under the most different external conditions.
A last remarkable result of the inverse distribution of the species of each genus of Brachiopoda in the three systems, as shown in the foregoing Table, is, that the total of the species in each of them is but slightly different, and that the number of the species common to two of these systems is almost perfectly equal, whether in reference to the first and second or to the second and third.
VIII a. Gasteropoda.—Like the Conchifera monomyaria and dimyaria, the Gaste- ropod Mollusca were far from presenting during the Palaeozoic such numerous genera and species as during the following periods, and their feeble relative proportion is even yet more striking. The Phyllidiance and the Calyptraciana have some representatives in the three systems, but they do not possess any particular interest. Shells related to the genus Melania are very plentiful in the mountain limestone of Belgium ; and it is the same with the Naticce, which are also very common in Yorkshire and in the Rhenish provinces, and one species, the N. subcostata, nobis, is very abundant in the Devonian beds of Paffrath. Some species are found in the Carboniferous system of the north of Russia, and two in the province of Bolivia. Shells related to Neritre have been pointed out in the Silurian beds of England, in the Devonian system in England and at Elbersreuth, also in the mountain limestone of Belgium and the British Islands. The Schizostonus, which begin the series of genera characterized by a fissure in the right lip, and at that time so well developed, are peculiarly Devonian, but are still few in number. The S. radiata, nob., is found in Devonshire and the Eifel.
We pass over some unimportant genera to come to the Euomphali, which were very numerous during the three ancient periods. Seventeen are Silurian, and are very plentiful in that system in England and Scandinavia. The E. rugosus, Sow., E. funatus, id., and E. alatus, His., are particularly characteristic of it. Among the seventeen of the middle system found in England, on the banks of the Rhine and at Elbersreuth, the E. annulatus, Phil., alone is found both in Devonshire and in the Rhenish provinces. The species common to the two lower systems have a wider geographical range ; the E. gualteriatus of Schlotheim, in particular, is stated to occur at Christiania, in the islands of Gottland, Aland, and Dago, at Revel, Paffrath and Chimay. The Carboniferous system is still richer in species than the preceding; they are frequent in the mountain limestone of Yorkshire, Belgium, the banks of the Rhine, and north and central Russia. The E. pen- tangulatus and E. Catillus, Sow., are characteristic of this system throughout that extent, and the latter, according to American authorities, is also found upon the shores of Lake Erie and in the state of New York. The E. Labadyei, nob., and E. Serpula, de Kon., are found both in the Devonian and Carboniferous systems.
Among the Cirri (a genus that we retain provisionally) there are also some Devonian and Carboniferous species. The C. rotundatus, Sow. (Euomph. Dionysii, auct.), is frequent in the beds of the upper system, and a conoidal variety is found at Paffrath.
The Pleurotomarice, still more numerous than the Euomphali, are very unequally distributed in the three epochs : the number of species increases from below upwards in the following progression, viz. three are Silurian, nineteen are Devonian, and forty-nine Carboniferous. The species in the first system are unimportant. Those peculiar to the second are particularly developed in Devonshire and in the corresponding deposits of Paffrath and Villmar on the right bank of the Rhine, although there are really very few species common to the two localities. The P. expansa, Phil., P. monilifera, id., P. Defrancii, nob., and P. limbata, Phil., lived through the two latter periods. The P. Delphinuloides, Goldf., and its numerous varieties, seem also to belong to both systems. The Pleurotomaria, which, with many other genera, are lost sight of from the coal-beds to the lias, reappear in great number in the lower beds of the oolitic series and decrease successively in the newer deposits, until they are represented in our present seas only by the little genus Scissurella.
The Trochi, much less abundant than the Pleurotomaria, are nevertheless distributed in the same manner in the three systems, whether in a horizontal or vertical direction. The T. helicites, Sow. (in Murch. Sil. Syst.), is both Silurian and Devonian. The T. Bouei, Stein., belongs to the second system in the southwest of England, in the Eifel, and at Paffrath. The T. Yvanii f, Lev., appears to have lived in the last two periods. The species of Turbo are more equally distributed in the three systems. The Turritella of the ancient epochs are in general insufficiently characterized, in consequence of their having almost always lost the mouth. Among the twenty-six species which now remain, of which it will undoubtedly be necessary to suppress some, three are Silurian, eight Devonian, and fourteen Carboniferous.
The Murchisonia, on the contrary, are neatly characterized shells, and appear to have been peculiar to the ancient beds : four species are Silurian, ten Devonian, and four Carboniferous ; and three are both Devonian and Carboniferous ; namely, the M. spinosa, Phil., M. angulata, id., and M. taniata, nob. These shells are particularly abundant in the Devonian beds of the banks of the Rhine. The genus Loxonema, which consists of shells formerly classed among the Terebra and Melania, is also more exclusively Devonian. The L. rugifera and L. tumida, Phil., are nevertheless found in the two upper systems. The Buccina, only one species of which is noticed in the Silurian system, are less rare in the intermediate, and twelve are reckoned in the superior system. The B. acutum and B. imbricatum lived in large numbers during the Devonian and Carboniferous periods in England, in Belgium, and on the banks of the Rhine. The B. arculatum, Schlot., presents numerous varieties in the limestones of Paffrath, as well as the B. Schlo- theimii, nob., which is also found in the corresponding beds of Devonshire. Those shells of the older beds which have been united to Buccinum, differ nevertheless in the characters of the aperture sufficiently to authorize the establishment of the subgenus proposed by Phillips under the name of Macrocheilus. With respect to the other genera of Gasteropods which have been noticed as represented in the first sedimentary beds, we think it right to say that they are only approximations too incomplete to be mentioned here.
In considering collectively the number of species of this class distributed in each system, a very decided increase from below upwards may be observed, for there are 63 Silurian, 116 Devonian, and 225 Carboniferous ; a progression which appears to have been continuous to the present time, notwithstanding some local and momentary interruptions in the secondary periods.
VIII h. Pteropoda.—We refer provisionally to this class the genus Conularia, of which we know eleven species ; or six Silurian, four Devonian, and two Carboniferous. The C. quadrisulcata, Sow., belongs to the uppermost system only, having been wrongly noticed as belonging to the more ancient beds. The Conularice are spread over the various parts of Europe and North America, and are also found in the south of Africa : they do not appear to show themselves above the coal-measures.
VIII c. Heteropoda.—Bellerophon is a genus peculiar to the Palaeozoic deposits of the several epochs, in which specimens are more or less extensively distributed. As in the preceding genera, the species peculiar to any one system are usually found only in a few localities, and consequently it must very rarely happen that any one species should characterize a system through any great extent of country. Fifteen are Silurian, twenty-one Devonian, and six are common to the two series. Among these we shall mention the B. Murchisoni, d’Orb., of the tilestone or lowest stratum of the old red sandstone of England f, and which is also found in the slates of Wissenbach ; then the B. trilobatus, Sow. (in Murch. Sil. Syst.), B. carinatus, id., and B. acutus, id. The last, which belongs to the lower Silurian beds of England, reappears in the limestones of Elbersreuth, and is found in the ancient beds of Southern Africa. The Carboniferous system is still richer than the preceding ; it contains thirty-six species, which are very common in the mountain limestone of Scotland, Ireland, England, Belgium, and of the north and centre of Russia. The B. Verneuilli, d’Orb., of Vise has been likewise found in the Altai. Lastly, the B. Urii, Fleming, (B. Atlantoides, d’Orb.), and B. apertus, Sow., common to the three systems in England, Belgium, and on the banks of the Rhine, show their close mutual relations. In North America this genus equally characterizes'the Palaeozoic rocks, not only in all the northern states on the shores of the great lakes, but also of those which occupy the centre of the great vale of the Mississippi, and on the west of that river even to the foot of the Rocky Mountains in the Missouri, the Prairies and the Arkansas.
VIII d. Cephalopoda.—If we judge of the number of animals of this class which peopled the primary seas only by the remains of their solid parts which have been preserved until our time, we should readily regard them as nearly equal to the Bra- chiopoda ; it is, however, probable that those seas furnished nourishment to great numbers of naked Cephalopods which have left no evident trace of their existence.
The Nautili are rare in the Silurian system: we have seen descriptions of only four in Europe, of which one is stated to be found in the island of Gottland, two occur in Esthoniaf, and one in the Caradoc sandstone of Llandovery J. Only two are Devonian, from the south-west of England; but forty are Carboniferous, and are distributed through the beds of this system in Ireland, England, Belgium, on the banks of the Rhine, and they extend as far as Donetz and even to the Ural chain. The N. globatus, Sow., multicarinatus, id., cariniferus, id., tuberculatus, id., and sulcatus, id., are those which are found at the most distant points. The species of this genus found in the ancient beds are generally small, and some of them have one or two keels, a character which is no longer found in the secondary and more recent periods, in which, moreover, the Nautili attain much greater dimensions.
We will here regard the Orthoceratites as a great family, in which we shall arrange as genera and subgenera those species which are more or less spiral at their summit, more or less inflated toward the aperture, or those in which may be remarked a siphon, whose singular and varied form indicates important modifications in the organ which occupied it ; and we retain the name of Orthoceratite for those which are straight and regularly conical.	-
The Orthoceratites, properly so called, are extremely abundant in the deposits anterior to the Carboniferous ; and the nearly equal distribution of the species in the three systems is a remarkable circumstance, which we have yet had occasion to notice only in'reference to the Terebratulae. The forty-six Silurian species almost all belong to England and Scandinavia ; a very few are found in the Upper Silurian rocks of Esthonia§, Ingria, in the beds of Trenton Falls ||, and in those of Tennessee.
Of the forty-seven species of the Devonian system the greater part belong to the limestones of Elbersreuth and the Fichtelgebirge, and they are less plentiful in the beds of the same age on the banks of the Rhine, in the Eifel, Belgium, and the west of England. The seven species which are common to the first two systems are also obtained in the most distantly separated countries : such are 0. Ibex, Sow. (Sil. Syst.), found in England, at Wissenbach and Gottland; the 0. Ludense, id., of England, Elbersreuth and Revel; the 0.regularis, Blum., and 0. Calamiteus, Count Munster. The fifty-two Carboniferous species have been particularly observed in Scotland, and in the mountain limestone of Ireland, Yorkshire and Belgium. They are not common in the coeval deposits of the north of Russia. The 0. Unguis, Phil., 0. Steinhaueri, Sow., and 0. Gesneri, Mart., have been pointed out as occurring at the most distant localities in Europe. Three species, the 0. cylindraceus, 0. lateralis, and 0. giganteus, are Devonian as well as Carboniferous ; and the 0. imbricatus, Wahl., with 0. cinctus, Sow., unite the three systems together.
If the great development of the Orthoceratites in the ancient seas of our hemisphere be considered, it will appear astonishing that only five or six species should be known in North America, where the contemporaneous deposits are so much more greatly extended ; but a sort of compensation is established between the two sides of the Atlantic by means of other genera, as we shall presently show.
The Cyrthoceratites are very scarce in the Silurian system, but they are extensively developed in the Devonian, in which are reckoned twenty-one species, from the south-west of England, the Eifel, and the banks of the Rhine. One of these is noticed at the cascade of Montmorency in Canada. Of nine Carboniferous species, eight are from the environs of Tournay, and the ninth, common to this and the preceding system, is found in Devonshire and the north of Russia. Of the Phragmoceratites, four belong to the Ludlow beds and two to the limestones of the Eifel and Elbersreuth. Of ten species of Lituites, nine are Silurian, and occur in England, Scandinavia, and Esthonia.
We have just remarked upon the rarity of the true Orthoceratites in North America, and the same may be observed relatively to these last genera : still this great family is not the less fully represented ; only, instead of specific characters, taken from the external shells, much more decided differences may be observed— differences in accordance with the organization of the animals which occupied the shell. If the species which have been made in Europe are more numerous, the types of the genera or subgenera in America are more varied. Thus the Conotubularim of the state of Tennessee have only two analogues in Europe, iventris, His., and 0. cochlearis, Sclilot. The Actinoceratites and the Conoceratites, from the island of Thessalon in Lake Huron and from Lake Winipeg, are nearly all peculiar to those countries, as we know of only one European species, which is found in Irelandf. The Ormoceratites, the siphon of which, when cut through, is characterized by singular volutions, belong moreover to the same regions, as well as the Orthostoma communis§ of the state of NewYork, and the Spirula from Tennessee!
Of all the genera which we have as yet recalled to notice, no one has presented so confined a distribution united to so great a local development as the Clymenia. Thus, of forty-three species, three belong to the Silurian formation of Esthonia, according to Professor Eichwald; and of thirty-nine Devonian, thirty-five are confined to the limestones of the Fichtelgebirge, Elbersreuth, and Silesia ; and of these thirty-five, three are found in Devonshire associated with four others. It is not impossible that some Goniatites, whose chambers are not known, and which are found in Silesia and upon the banks of the Rhine, may be true Clymenia; as the beds which contain them also belong to the Devonian system. A single Clymenia has been discovered in the Carboniferous system in Ireland. This genus is absent in the overlying beds intermediate between the Carboniferous system and the muschelkalk ; but one species has been mentioned in that deposit. None are at present known in the oolitic beds; and some casts referred to this genus from the chalk of Faxoe, seem to belong to Nautili; but the tertiary beds contain some species.
At length the Goniatites close our review of the Mollusca, in presenting to us a greater number of species than any one of the genera we have yet mentioned. Nevertheless they begin to appear only with the latest of the Silurian beds, and in but one single locality, the slates of Wissenbach. Starting from this period, they become extremely multiplied in the Devonian limestones of Gattendorf and Schubelhammer, and in some other localities of the Fichtelgebirge and Elbersreuth, concurrently with Clymenia and a multitude of Cardiacea, Inocerami, and Posidonia; while the Orthoceratites, the Trilobites, and the Trachelipod Mollusca are only to be seen in the beds above them. Goniatites are plentiful enough in the deposits of the same age in Westphalia and in the duchy of Nassau, and in those of the southwest of England.
The fifty-nine Goniatites of the Carboniferous system are found over a much more considerable extent than the eighty-five Devonian. The mountain limestone of Yorkshire contains the greatest number. Some have been discovered in the upper group of the Carboniferous system in the Ural mountains. The species most widely distributed are the G. Henslowi, Sow., obtained in the Isle of Man, from the culm- measures of Devonshire, in Staffordshire, and at Ecton in the state of New York f ; the G. Listen, Mart., from Derbyshire and the province of Liege, stated also to occur in India on the banks of the Ganges |; the G. carbonarius of Goldfuss from Yorkshire and the banks of the Rhine; the G. sphcericus, Mart., from Derbyshire, the Isle of Man, Yorkshire, the province of Liège, Herborn, and the state of New York; and lastly, the G. striatus, Sow., is met with in nearly all these localities.
The Goniatites have been but seldom noticed in the ancient beds of North America ; and those which have been mentioned are from the Carboniferous system. According to Conrad there are none in the Trenton group which form the lower part of the Silurian system, and they are extremely rare in the upper beds of the series. The genera Trocholites and Phragmolites of the state of New York seem to approach in structure the Goniatites.
From the sagacious observations of M. von Buch, naturalists are well acquainted with the characters in which the Goniatites or Ammonites of the ancient beds differ from the true Ammonites of the secondary beds ; but if the Goniatites themselves be attentively examined, characters will be observed in the exterior contour of their chambers indicative of the antiquity of the system in which they are found. Thus the G. Noeggerathii, de Buch, and G. subnautilinus, id., from the Silurian schists of Wissenbach, belong to the first section, which is characterized by rounded or very slightly inflected lobes. Of all the families of the Ammonites, these have the edges of the chambers the most simple. In the Devonian system the lobes are more decided, angular and linguiform, but the dorsal lobe is constantly simple. In the Carboniferous system, on the contrary, nearly all the species (four or five only excepted) have the dorsal lobe divided. From these to the Serratites of the muschelkalk, and thence to the true Ammonites of the lias and the later formations, the passage is perfectly gradual in relation to the chambers ; but this progression does not appear to exist relatively to the dimensions of the shells, the Goniatites being almost always small.
In general the Cephalopods appear to have been much more extensively distributed in the ancient European than in the American seas. As to the number of species in the three systems, it will appear to be much more considerable in the Devonian system than in the two others.
Insecta.—It has long been doubted if animals of this class could have lived in the ancient periods ; and then, on the other hand, the extreme delicacy of their parts, at least in the greater number of the orders, is such, that a hope could scarcely be entertained that any traces of those which did exist should have been transmitted to us : all doubt on this subjecthas however ceased, two species belonging to the family of Curculionidce having been found in the coal-fields of Coalbrook Dale, as well as a Neuropterous insect, which closely resembles the genus Corydalis now living in Carolina; also a Libellula, or an insect related to the Phasmidce*. As to the Orthoptera and Arachnides, mentioned in the general treatises on the science, we have not yet sufficiently precise indications relative to them to reckon upon here. Count Sternberg has likewise announced the discovery of a fossil scorpion in the coal-measures at Chomle, near Radnitz in Bohemiaf. It is further easily conceivable, that, as insects could only leave traces of their existence in exceptional and very rare instances, it is very improbable that we should ever have a satisfactory knowledge of this part of the fauna of the ancient formations.
Crustacea.—The Crustacea of these far-distant epochs belong almost exclusively to the family of Trilobites, in which a great number of genera have been established. What we have already said relative to the uncertainty of many of the approximations and determinations of genera and species of bivalve shells, is much more strongly applicable to the Trilobites, of which, as it is rare to have at once under our observation any great number of complete specimens of each species, we are reduced to the necessity of taking some isolated and external characters to establish not only a species, but even a genus ; and we are only acquainted with the organization of these animals by more or less distant analogies, so that these incomplete characters being the result of the imperfect state of the casts, the uncertainty which reigns throughout this branch of the science, notwithstanding the special works of which it has been the subject both in Europe and in America, may be conceived.
The Trilobites begin to appear in the most ancient beds in which any organic remains of the animal kingdom have yet been observed. They seem also to have been peculiar to the Palaeozoic epoch, not even continuing so high as the upper part of the Carboniferous system ; a circumstance which agrees with their rapid decrease in proportion as they rise from the most ancient Silurian beds towards the succeeding deposits, as pointed out by Mr. Murchison.
The Calymene, which are very abundant in the Silurian system of Europe, are not less so in that of America. Of eighteen species, principally from England and Sweden, some are also found in Esthonia, Livonia, and France. The C.Blumenbachii of Brongniart is, of all the Silurian fossils, that which has been observed in the greatest number of countries : first at Dudley and in the west of England; then in the slates of Wissenbach and in the grauwacke of Daun; throughout Scandinavia and the dependent islands ; in Esthonia #, Ingria, and the west of France ; in the Cedar Mountains of South Africa f ; in the states of Ohio, New York and Tennessee; and wherever the deposits of this epoch are to be seen from the great lakes as far as Alabama J. Of ten Devonian species, the greater part are from the limestones of the Eifel, and from those of corresponding age in the environs of Elbersreuth and in the Fichtelgebirge. Two species are common to the preceding period: one, the C. macrophthalma, Brong., to which several names have been given, and which, with the C. Sclerops, Dalm., now forms the genus Phacops§, has been noticed in nearly all the countries in which we have observed the C. Blumenbachii, also at Prague, in the Eifel, and in the state of Virginia; the other, the C. Tristani (Brong.), from the west of France, is also found in the grauwacke of the Eifel and to the west of the Cape of Good Hope. The C. concinna of Dalman is at present the only species which has been observed in the three systems.
The Homalonoti, which are but few in number, are principally Silurian. H. Knightii of Konig|| is the most common ; it is found in England, in the grauwacke of the Eifel, and upon the banks of the Rhine, also in the Devonian system of the west of England and at Nehou. The H. Herschelii, Murch., found in the south of Africa ^[, occurs likewise on the banks of the Rhine.
The Asaphi are even more plentiful than the Calymene; forty-six species are Silurian, and particularly noticed in England, Scandinavia, Esthonia, Ingria, and North America. Asaphus caudatus, Brong., A. Hausmannii, id., A. cornigerus, id., are the most frequent in the Silurian deposits on both sides of the Atlantic. Six only are from the Devonian system, and eleven are Carboniferous. The A. granu- liferus of Phillips is found in the two later systems.
Of eleven species of Paradoxides, nine belong to the lower system in the west of England, Scandinavia, and the state of New York; two are noticed in Bohemia and one at Elbersreuth, in the middle system. Illcenus occurs nearly under the same condition : of this genus, one species, the I. crassicauda, Dalm., is met with in Scandinavia, Ingria, Brittany, and the west of England; two species are Devonian. At present only five species of Ogygia are known, of which three are from the environs of Angers, one from Llandeilo, and one from the banks of the Mohawk in the state of New York. The genus Brontes is principally Devonian; the B. flabellifer, Goldf., so diffused through the beds of the middle system of the west of England, the Cotentin, Belgium, the Eifel, the banks of the Rhine, and found even on the Asiatic exposure of the Ural, existed also when the upper Ludlow beds were deposited. The Oleni are occasionally met with in the first two systems. The Cryptq- nimi are from Ingria and Esthonia. The genera Battus, Nilceus, Lychas and Ampyx belong principally to the Silurian beds of Scandinavia ; as the genera Otarion, Ellipsocephalus and Conocephalus probably do to the less ancient beds of Bohemia f. Lastly, the genera Isoletus, Eurypterus, Cryphesus, Dipleurus, Ceraurus, Triarthrus, Nuttania, Brongniartia, and many others which contain only one or two species, have yet been noticed only in North America. The Isoletes gigas appears to be one of the most abundant Trilobites in that quarter of the globe.
In recapitulation, there are in the inferior strata 132 species of the family of Trilobites, without including thirty-six North American species, of which the greater part are probably found in beds belonging to the Silurian system ; there are also thirty-two in the Devonian and twenty-four in the upper system : seven only are common to the two first, while one alone pervades the three palaeozoic series.
Among the other genera of the class Crustacea, we may mention a Limulus from the coal-measures of Coalbrook Dale§ ; Cytherince, from the Silurian strata in the island of Gottland || and the neighbourhood of Christiania, also from the Devonian system; and other minute genera, such as Cypris or Cytherina, Cypridina, Cyprella and Cypridella, belonging to the Carboniferous system of Belgium, Scotland, and some other countries.
Pisces.—If the Crustacea, highly elevated as they are in the scale of beings, appear to have been among the first animals on the surface of the globe, such was not the case with the class which succeeds them in organization. The most ancient traces of fishes known to us are not found below the lowermost Ludlow beds, in which remains of the Pterygotus problematicus have been found ; in the upper beds the species are more common and their characters better defined. The genera Onchus, Sclerodus, Plectrodus, Thelodus and Sphagodus mark this zone; hut it was in the Devonian period that the animals of this class really took possession of the seas. In Scotland, in the west of England, in Courland, Livonia and Lithuania, the Devonian beds contain numerous remains of those remarkable lori- cated fishes, such as the Holoptychius and the Coccosteus, or of such as are furnished with aliform appendages or extraordinary fins, as the Pterichthys and other allied Ichthyolites. The genera Cephalaspis, Osteolepis, Cheirolepis, &c., are not rare in the old red sandstone of England and Scotland. The most extensively distributed fish of this period was the Holoptychius nobilissimus, which is found not only in all those countries we have mentioned, but also in the centre of Russia in Europe and even in Pennsylvania, associated with a Megalichthys in beds of the same age. A species of Coccosteus is also noticed in North America.
Fishes have also lived in great numbers during the coal period: thus the coal- measures of Sarrehruck have produced the genera Acanthcessus and Amblypterus; those of Shrewsbury, Coalbrook Dale and Titterston Hill have furnished the Ctenodus, Megalichthys, Gyracanthus, Ctenacanthus, &c. The Holoptychii seem to pass up from the middle system into this; and Palceoniscus, of which the species are abundant enough in the coal-measures of the United States, lived also in the epoch of the zechstein (magnesian limestone or Permian system), a circumstance which further tends to unite zoologically this last-mentioned deposit with the true Palaeozoic rocks. Not a single species of fish has hitherto been noticed in any two systems.
Notwithstanding the importance of the class, we can give only this general view of it; the slight special acquaintance we have with the animals which compose it not permitting us to give a more complete idea of the actual state of science in relation to them.
If then some few species were capable of resisting all the changes which modified external circumstances during the three ancient periods, it may be supposed that the same was the case during the formation of the less mighty secondary beds ; and it will be difficult to admit that the uprisings, which, during the deposition of these latter, changed the face of nature in certain countries, could have occasioned at the same time the complete destruction of animals which then lived in the seas most distant from the theatre of those great phsenomena.
The examination and the nature of the review which we have taken of the Palaeozoic Fauna appear to us to modify a little the scientific opinion long entertained, that the organic beings of the ancient seas had a simplicity of structure and a uniformity in their distribution, which entirely distinguished them from those characters which the more modern deposits present. This assertion derived its greatest strength from the fact, that the more easily studied secondary and tertiary beds have presented much higher numerical results than the others, and have done it much sooner. If the numerous circumstances which will for a long time, and perhaps for ever, prevent the creation of the ancient periods from being as well known as that of the most recent, be taken into account, it will be seen that species were already very varied and very numerous in the Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous seas, and that the general uniformity of their distribution is less than has been stated. We have noticed many genera which lived at only certain epochs and in very limited areas, thus constituting local faunas, comparable to what is observed in the more recent deposits ; but this would not prevent other genera or other species which lived in the same localities from existing at the same time at the most distant parts of the earth, and in the most various latitudes.
If certain divisions, such as the Gasteropoda, the Monomyaria, the Dimyaria, and the Annelides, had comparatively few representatives in the ancient seas, others, such as the Polyparia and the Cephalopoda, are not less plentiful than in any of the following periods ; and some, such as the Brachiopoda and the Crinoidea, are infinitely more varied. Lastly, if the development of Paheozoic organism be considered relatively to the thickness of the beds or duration of the epoch, we shall see, 1st, that the total number of species always increases from below upwards ; 2nd, that the progression is very different in each order and in each family, and that this progression is even frequently inverse, either in the different orders of the same class or in the various genera of the same order. If, on the other hand, this development of the Palaeozoic creation be considered relatively to its horizontal extent, or geographically in relation to space, it will be seen, 1st, that the species which are found in a great number of localities and in very distant countries, are almost always those which have lived during the formation of several successive systems ; 2nd, that the species which belong to a single system are rarely observed at great distances, and that they then constitute local fauna, peculiar to certain countries; whence it results, that the species really characteristic of a system of beds are so much the less numerous as the system is studied upon a vaster scale.

