
It was under the influence of these sentiments that I had the honour of reading before the Academy on the 20th of August last, some doubts and observations relating to the supposed fossil Didelphis found at Stonesfield ; in which observations my object was rather to draw the attention of English naturalists to a matter of such great importance in palaeontology, and to show how questions of this nature ought to be treated, than really to solve the problem, deprived as I was of the necessary elements for so doing. After having indeed set forth and compared the data that I was able to advance as premises in the question, and which data necessarily became the special subject of the discussion, I arrived at the conclusion that the fossil jaws from the oolitic schist of Stonesfield had 
certainly not belonged to an animal of the marsupial subclass, nor even to the family of the Insectivora of the placental subclass; and that hence it became probable that it was not even a mammal, but rather an oviparous animal of the family of the saurians, in the class Reptilia. But before giving a definite character to these conclusions, I was very careful to mention to you that I had not examined any one of the original fragments upon which I raised these doubts, having only seen the figures and descriptions of them which had been published by M. Constant Prevost, Mr. Broderip, and Dr. Buckland. I therefore concluded my memoir by invoking the aid of those skilful observers who had the fossil remains in their possession, or at their disposal, to assist in 
the farther examination of the question. 

The result of my appeal has not, I am happy to say, been long delayed. Professor Buckland, who has two of these fragments under his care in the Ashmolean Museum, at Oxford, being about to visit Paris, Dr. Roberton, at the suggestion of M. Laurillard, happily thought of requesting him to 
bring them with him, which he did ; but unfortunately for me, and perhaps for the question, the day on which Dr. Roberton wished me to pass an evening at his house with Dr. Buckland, I had set out for the country, and thus lost the opportunity of clearing up my doubts, and of correcting any errors 
I might have committed. Nevertheless this courteous and liberal attention of Professor Buckland has not been without advantageous results, since, during my absence, four persons, — M. Agassiz, M. Valenciennes, and two of our fellow-members, M. E. GeofTroy and M. Dumeril, have made known to 
the Academy their observations on the same subject; and thus the inquiry is seriously taken up. 

The first of these observations in point of date is due to M. Agassiz, who, in a letter addressed to the Academy on the 3rd of September, and inserted in the 'Connotes Rendus,' (p. 537, 
2nd. sem., 1838), claims priority in the view which I had adduced, by saying that since the year 1835 he had offered an opinion concerning the supposed Didelphis from Stonesfield, perfectly in accordance with mine. Although I certainly had no knowledge of the fact, it would have been very unskilful of me not to have supported my opinion by those of observers like Prof. Grant, M. Agassiz, and M. Meyer ; I therefore did so, and I thought I should secure myself against all reproach 
on this subject, by quoting M. Agassiz as having at first entertained the same views as myself, but as having afterwards apparently abandoned them. As to the rest, I am far from refusing myself the credit, which I may claim as a matter of justice, of having added some fresh details upon this subject. 
M. Agassiz appears to have mentioned these fossils for the first time in 1835, in a very short note inserted in the German Journal of MM. Leonhard and Bronn, p. 186 ; and, according to M. Valenciennes, the object of this note is to establish, in a definite manner, the opinion that the Stonesfield animals are undoubtedly mammals, but that their affinity with the marsupials does not appear to him so evident ; that the teeth are more like those of the Insectivora, and that they also bear some resemblance to those of the seals. From this then it appears that the claim of M. Agassiz can relate only to the erroneously supposed relation of these fossil remains to the opossums, and to a certain resemblance of the posterior molars to those of many species of seal. I therefore very willingly repeat what I said in my first " Doubts," and which I learned from M. de Roissy, that M. Agassiz had told him that he had printed in a note added to the German translation of Prof. 
Buckland's work on Geology and Mineralogy, that the fossil bones of Stonesfield did not belong to a mammiferous animal. 
To this M. de Roissy added that he knew from another source, and not from M. Agassiz, as I erroneously remarked in my first "doutes," that Dr. Grant, the Professor of Comparative Anatomy at the London University, had advanced the same opinion in his course of Lectures this year, at the same time assigning his reasons for it. 
But as I have been able myself to consult the first article quoted above, in M. Leonhard's Journal, and the second in the German translation of Dr. Buckland's work, of which, however, a part only has recently arrived in Paris ; — I think it requisite for me to give my own literal translation of it, in 
order that I may be able to notice some inaccuracies which have escaped M. Valenciennes. 

In the first place let us consider the first note. 

"As to the enigmatical species of Didelphis from Stonesfield," says M. Agassiz, " I now know that it is not a fish. — I have seen all the specimens which are in the English collections, — five lower half jaws belonging to two species, — but nowhere any trace of vertebra, or of bones of the extremities. 
The trenchant crown of the largest molars, laterally compressed, always has two small notches on each side, and consequently five pointed tubercles. The smaller ones have but three ; they are certainly those of mammals ; but that they may be compared with the teeth of the marsupials, is not the case. The dental system indeed has also much resemblance to that of the Insectivora, and each separate tooth resembles even the greater part of those of the seals, near which group the animal to which these jaws belonged should form a distinct genus. In fact the aspect of these fossil fragments is so peculiar, that it draws our attention towards aquatic animals rather than away from them." — 

M. de Blainville also quotes the second note of M. Agassiz, which, though longer, adds scarcely anything to the contents of the first; except that M. Agassiz very justly remarks that M. Cuvier, in speaking of these fossils, never positively affirmed that they ought to rank in the genus Didelphis ; and he [M. Agassiz] proposes to designate the genus by the name of Amphigonus, 

From these two passages we may infer, that prior to his having actually seen these fossils, M. Agassiz had supposed that they might belong to a fish ; an opinion which he has abandoned to refer them decidedly to the class Mammalia. 

Thus, as M. Valenciennes properly observes, it would be unjust in M. Agassiz to lay claim to the opposite opinion ; although in fact neither of these articles has for its object the establishing, in a direct manner, that these remains from Stonesfield are those of mammals; as M. Valenciennes ne- 
vertheless observes. We may, on the contrary, find there the assertion, though destitute of proofs, that the dental system of the supposed Didelphis of Stonesfield is too far removed from that of the marsupials to allow of our placing it in that sub-class ; and that if, regarded in its totality, it bears a certain resemblance to what we find in the Insectivora, the posterior teeth in particular may also be compared to those of certain seals. He thus leans towards the opinion that it is rather an aquatic than a terrestrial animal, considering it as approaching to the seals. We there also find that M. Agas- 
siz was of opinion that these fossils ought to form a distinct genus ; but that he did not propose for this genus the name Amphigonus until his second note ; of this, indeed I, was ignorant, as M. Valenciennes very correctly observes, nor could I possibly have known it, since this note, if it were printed at the time my memoir was read, was certainly not published. 

Finally, I ought to notice a very just observation of M. Agassiz, which is, that M. G. Cuvier, in speaking of these fossils, always retained a doubtful form of expression, or at least very slightly affirmative, and such as would follow from a very rapid and consequently slight examination. 

But of the four communications made to the Academy relating to the supposed Didelphis from Stonesfield, that of M. Valenciennes must necessarily occupy the first place, as being the longest. In fact, Dr. Buckland, who from the first intrusted these fossils to M. Laurillard, that is to say, not 
only the specimen upon which rests the Did. Prevostii of M. Cuvier, but also another, in some respects more complete, and of which no one had previously spoken ; — at the particular 
request of M. Valenciennes, very obligingly allowed him to make them the subject of his observations, and even to take from them impressions in sulphur, very carefully executed, 
and the casts in plaster were thus procured which are to enrich the paleontological collection of our Museum. 

M. Valenciennes has also received, through M. Laurillard, a drawing very carefully executed, which appears to me to be that originally sent to M. G. Cuvier by Mr. Phillips, and which was taken from a third half-jaw in the possession of Mr. Sikes. 

So that instead of the two specimens of this curious fossil being, as I imagined, the only ones existing in England, geologists now possess four, including that in Mr. Broderip's collection, and even five, according to the first note of M. Agassiz, without reckoning the fragment in "Ecole des Mines'' which we mentioned in our first "doutes," and which is generally referred to the saurians. 

From an actual examination of the two portions of jaw brought over by Professor Buckland, merely the casts of which have been exhibited to the Academy ; — and from the drawing of that in the collection of Mr. Sikes ; — M. Valenciennes returns to M. Cuvier's opinion, that it is a marsupial 
mammal ; he however thinks, like every one before him, that it must form a distinct genus, to which he assigns another new name ; " mais qu'il choisit assez signicatif pour qu'a lui seul, il formule nettement sa maniere de voir." 

It is also on this side of the question that M. E. Geoffroy de Saint-Hilaire, and M. Dumeril have ranged themselves ; the one without explaining the reasons of his conviction, the other basing his upon the presence of a condyle, and the unity of the jaw. 

Without doubt persons who are little versed in the study of organic structures, and who place too implicit a reliance on perhaps rather a presumptuous assertion, that by the aid of a single bone, or of a simple facette of a bone, the skeleton of an animal can be reconstructed, and consequently its class, order, family, genus, and even species determined, may very probably think it strange that four or five half-jaws, more or less furnished with teeth, should be insufficient to indicate promptly and with certainty to what class the animal to which they belonged should be referred ; but their astonishment would cease if they would in the first place observe that in the present case these jaws are perhaps not one of them entire ; that they are not to be fully examined either by ourselves or by the parties to whom they belong, on account of their attachment to the matrix enclosing them, and its extreme hardness ; but above all because the assertion above quoted, although it has almost passed into a common phrase, and is to a certain degree correct when we apply it to known 
animals, or to such as differ but little from them, becomes strained, and even quite fallacious, when the forms in question are more or less isolated, whether recent or fossil ; this will be placed beyond doubt in the continuation of my great paleontological work. 

M. De Blainville then passes on to the detailed description of three portions of jaw, which form fresh elements in the solution of the question. 

With respect to the first, the basis of the Did. Prevostii, of which he has been able to form a much more correct idea from the cast, and one very different to that derived from very inaccurate sketches, especially that given by M. Prevost, — he alludes chiefly to there being no trace of a condyle, but rather a sort of articular fossa, something like that in fishes ; he insists upon the presence of a lower marginal ridge, {sillori), and he observes that the teeth, which are far from displaying that regularity of disposition indicated by the figures which have been mentioned, have the summit of their roots adherent to, and continuous with, the substance of the jaw. 

Respecting the second portion of jaw which is now for the first time introduced in the discussion, and which, while it is more perfect with regard to the bone, is much less so as respects the dental system, — M. de Blainville thinks, in opposition to what was said of it by M. Valenciennes, who looked 
upon it as the inner side, that it is also a ramus of the right side, with its external aspect visible; and in proof of his opinion he points out the general curve of the horizontal portion longitudinally, and its declension towards the dental line ; the existence of a "fosse masstterienne" and of an angular process, which is evidently convex on the free side and bent back on the adherent one ; and finally, the existence of the same ridge (sillon) observed in the preceding piece. He does not admit the orifice of the dental canal noticed by M. Valenciennes as a small circular foramen, situated at the point of junction of the fosse massetgrienne with the horizontal branch ; M. de Blainville supposing that this appearance, which is so evident in the drawing, is owing to some defect in the colouring, since there exists no trace of it in the sulphur impression, nor upon the plaster cast. Neither does 
he admit the symphysis described by M. Valenciennes, any more than an articular condyle, nor even a coronoid process, clearly as it appears terminated in the figured fragment, because nothing similar shows itself in the sulphur impression. 

Finally, with respect to the third piece, consisting of a design carefully executed, which he has merely seen for a moment in the hands of M. Valenciennes, who unfortunately did not consider himself at liberty to lend it to him, — M. de Blainville thinks that the palmated, five-lobed form of the posterior 
molars would alone be sufficient to negative all approach to the didelphs, and even to the Mammalia. 

Insomuch that M. de Blainville reviewing the reasons upon which M. Valenciennes bases his opinion, namely, — the existence of a condyle, the presence of which upon either of the impressions cited M. de Blainville positively denies, — the form of the teeth, which certainly have no relation in num- 
ber, disposition, or shape, to those of the Didelphis murina, any more than to those of any other known mammal, although they support themselves upon what M. Agassiz has said of the teeth having five points, disposed as in the Insectivora, which is not the case, as we have seen in the note given literally above ; the aspect of the ascending ramus, which, in both specimens is mutilated, and has only left its impression, indicating a kind of very slender plate, slightly convex externally, and concave within ; —the symphysis, which exists only in appearance ; — the opening of the dental canal, of which also he denies the existence, since the jaw is seen on the outer side, and which had neither the form nor the position of that of the Didelphis, nor even of other Mammalia ; 
— the prolongation of the angular process, which has nothing in its shape to remind us of that of the didelphs, and which rather brings to our recollection that of certain fishes ; — and finally, the compound structure of the jaw, which might very well be no longer distinctly visible in a fragment so long ago fossilized, and yet have existed ; and of which, it appears to him there are left some traces in the lower marginal ridge still visible in the two specimens, and in the projection where it commences. 

M. de Blainville then finds himself compelled to pause, at least until fresh evidence be produced; in the conviction that the portions of fossil jaws found at Stonesfield, certainly do not belong to a marsupial, — and probably not to a placental mammal, either insectivorous or amphibious ; and that consequently it is more likely that the animal may have been oviparous. 

As to the doubt which he has just formed by analogy with what is known of the Basilosaurus, a large fossil reptile of America, the teeth of which display the peculiarity of possessing a double root, — that this might be an animal of the saurian order, — M. de Blainville says that if M. Agassiz, who 
has studied fossil fish much more even than himself, had not decidedly given his opinion against all approach to fishes, he would have been rather led to suppose that it might be an animal of that class. 

We see from this, adds M. de Blainville, that I ought to persist in retaining the name Amphitherium which I proposed, if only because it has the priority over that of Amphigonus given by M. Agassiz ; and that so much the more, because even if it should be beyond a doubt that these j aws are those 
of amammiferous animal, I see nothing in them, any more than in their dental system, which could lead to their being necessarily those of an opossum ; for, from the dental system, and especially from the molar teeth, to form conclusions respecting the rest of the organization, aDd above all as to its 
marsupial nature, is, as I propose to show in a report which I am about to make immediately to the Academy, to go far beyond what the method of analogy will allow. 

As to the rest, it appears that every one has not regarded the question as so completely solved as our fellow-members have supposed it to be ; since, according to what is reported to me by a zoologist and anatomist, whom, for my own part, I very much regret I do not see among the number of competitors for the vacant place in our section, Dr. Buckland has himself offered the problem and the fragments on which it rests, to the investigation of the German naturalists assembled in congress at Fribourg, in Brisgau, in the month of September last, which was his intention in bringing them to Paris. 

We may therefore hope that the German zoologists who have seen and studied these enigmatical fossils, co-operating with those who possess or have access to them in England, and the matter being discussed by arguments based upon evident and incontestible facts, it may attain to a demonstration, of what nature is of but little consequence, provided it be satisfactory enough to be admitted, if not generally, at least by all those who, in scientific questions, are so fortunate as to have leisure and the ability to judge without prejudice, but with a knowledge of the cause. 

In conclusion I ought also to announce to the Academy, that the scientific conductor of the English Journal called the ' Athenaeum/ has already laid before his readers the point under discussion, having no doubt but that there will soon be discovered, in the Stonesfield quarries, some 
fragment that will be sufficiently demonstrative ; and in the mean time he himself proposes, to avoid he says being accused of partiality towards either of the three already proposed, — the name Botheratiotherium for the supposed Didelphis of the oolite ; so that science is already embarrassed 
with four or five denominations for an animal, of which our knowledge is most imperfect ; since, by one party it is referred to the Mammalia, by another to the insectivorous monodelphs, or the Amphibia ; and by a third to the didelphs allied to opossums, or to a genus representing the seals, in the sub-class of Marsupialia ; whilst others make a saurian, or even a fish of it ; which, it may be remarked en passant, appears much more in accordance with the age and the geological character of the formation which contains the fossils in question, as well as with the organized bodies with which 
they are associated. 

