THE portion of the shore of Dorset and Devonshire, which the following pages are intended to describe, and part of which is represented in the annexed section, extends from about three miles west of Bridport Harbour, in the county of Dorset, to Babbacombe Bay on the south-west of Teignmouth. The elevation of the shore within these limits is various. On the west of Bridport the height of the cliffs is not very considerable; but they rise at Golden Cap, a remarkable cliff five miles east of Lyme, to about six hundred feet above the level of the sea; and from that point to Axmouth there is a succession of hills of nearly uniform elevation, and about five hundred feet in height. The cliffs near Beer are much lower than at Axmouth, but they rise westward towards Peak Hill and High Peak, near Sidmouth. At the mouth of the Otter the coast is much lower; but it rises again between that river and the Exe. The cliffs at Dawlish are comparatively low; but they become higher towards Teignmouth, and continue high from the river Teign to Babbacombe Bay.
Plate 8 is a section of the cliffs from near Bridport Harbour to Sidmouth, exhibiting the order of the strata, except between Lyme and Axmouth, where subsided masses of chalk and green sand entirely conceal the rocks below. I have in consequence given a representation of these cliffs as they actually appear; and in the following remarks I shall begin with the superior, and proceed in succession to the inferior beds, advancing in each case from the east towards the west.
  CHALK. 
The chalk, which is the uppermost of the beds observable on this part of the coast, contains many fossils, and an abundance of flints (occasionally in small seams): its first appearance, in the cast, is at Ware Cliffs, near Lyme Regis, resting upon green sand; and proceeding westward from thence, it forms the caps of the hills of Pinhay, Whitelands, Charlton, Rusedon, and Dowlands near Axmouth. At White Cliff and Beer Head, near Beer, it is in greater strength, resting upon green sand, which, together with the chalk, fills up a large hollow or basin in the red marl of the new red sandstone formation: and from this circumstance the chalk has, in the section, at this place, the appearance of two dips, the one west, the other east. From Beer Head, proceeding westward, the chalk continues to cap the hills, but gradually diminishes in thickness, until it disappears at Dunscombe Hill, a short distance to the east of Sidmouth.
  It is worthy of remark that, beneath the sea, seven miles south of the Cobbe Head at Lyme, at the depth of about fifteen fathoms, there are chalk rocks, well known to the fishermen who troll for fish.
Above the chalk of this coast there is almost always gravel composed of unrolled chalk flints. This deposit varies much in thickness: it is in great abundance at Dunscombe Hill, and the tops of several hills capped with green sand are also covered by angular chalk-flint gravel, the debris most probably of former superincumbent chalk.
GREEN SAND. 
The most eastern appearance of green sand on this part of the coast is at Down Cliff, a short distance to the west of Bridport Harbour, where it forms the top of the hill, resting upon beds of the oolite formation: proceeding westward, it forms the caps of Golden Cap, Shorne Cliff, Black Ven, &c. resting there upon blue lias. At Black Ven, between Charmouth and Lyme, there occur in the green sand regular compact and unbroken beds of chert; but on Shorne Cliff and Golden Cap Hill the same chert occurs, in the form of loose angular shattered fragments, occupying the same position in the green sand formation; and a similar disintegration of the chert is observable upon other hills between Lyme and Sidmouth, which are capped with green sand.
  To the west of Lyme, among the cliffs of Ware, Pinhay, Whitelands, &c. the solid and unbroken beds of chert are numerous, and contain many fine specimens of chalcedony.
  At Axmouth Point the green sand rests upon red marl. At White Cliff, near Beer, it dips below the level of the sea, still resting immediately upon red marl; but it rises again at Beer Head, and from thence towards Sidmouth occupies an intermediate position between the chalk and the red mad, until the former disappears at the summit of Dunscombe Hill, on the west of which the green sand caps the hills as far as Peak Hill and High Peak, west of Sidmouth, where it finally leaves the coast, but reappears in the interior, at fifteen miles distance, in a western direction, on Little Haldon Hill, near Teignmouth, resting upon new red conglomerate.
The green sand in the vicinity of Lyme contains numerous and various fossils; and in compact nodules of it, called Cow-stones by the masons of the country, there are found occasional remains of the Crustacea. Plate III. fig. 1. represents a species, the shell of which is so thin that the claws are seldom obtained perfect. The back of a singular fossil crab, from the same kind of stone, which is represented in fig. 2, is the only one of the kind that I have seen. Among the echinites of the green sand near Lyme, I lately obtained one which belongs to the genus named Echinonaus by Mr. Kbnig, in his arrangement at the British Museum; and as it is quite new, I have given it the name of Echinonaus lampas, from its great resemblance to an antique lamp. 
  LIAS. 
The blue lias makes its first appearance at the base of Down Cliff, rising from under beds of the oolite formation: proceeding westward from thence, it forms the lower and greater part of Golden Cap, Shorne Cliff, and Black Ven: to the westward also of Lyme it forms considerable cliffs; but the line that separates the green sand from the lias, on that part of the coast, is concealed by a beautiful undercliff, composed of fallen masses of chalk and green sand. The last observable portion of blue lias is at a short distance to the west of Culverhole Point, forming some very low cliffs on the shore. The line of separation between the red marl and lias is likewise masked by the undercliff. At the eastern base of Pinhay Cliffs a small portion of white lias rises from beneath the blue, but is soon thrown down by a fault: it reappears at a short distance west of Culverhole Point, and not far from the commencement of the red marl, from which it is separated by a few strata of blue lias.
  A few small faults occur in the blue lias under the church cliffs at Lyme; the general dip of the lias in that vicinity is gently towards the south-east.
From the state and elevation of the lias cliffs near Lyme, an excellent opportunity is afforded for the examination of its fossils, and many have recently been brought to light which were before unknown: the most remarkable of these are the remains of a singular animal, which has been named Ichthyosaurus by Mr. Kbnig, from its being supposed to form a link between the Saurians and Fish. Sir Everard Home gives it the name of Proteosaurus, and has described several parts of its osteology in the Philosophical Transactions; and the Rev. W. D. Conybeare and myself have published some further account of it in the fifth volume of the Transactions of this Society.
The remains of this animal are by no means rare; they arc principally discovered at Black Ven, and most commonly in the slaty or marly part of the lias. Three species of this fossil genus appear to me very distinguishable; the principal differences consisting in the form of the skull and teeth. I shall content myself at present by giving the names, communis, platyodon, and tenuirostris, to three species hitherto discovered; reserving for a future communication by the Rev. W. D. Conybeare and myself the reasons for so naming them, as well as a detailed account of the differences in their teeth.
Some of the animals of the genus Ichthyosaurus must have been of an enormous size. I have in my possession a vertebra of one of them, which measures seven inches and three quarters in diameter, with various portions of the paddle, which, when entire, must have measured (including the humerus) at least two feet and a half in length.
Besides the remains of the Ichthyosaurus, there are found in the lias of Lyme the bones of another animal, the Plesiosaurus, described by the Rev. \V. D. Conybeare and myself in the fifth volume of the Geological Transactions.
There occur also in the lias at this place singular bodies, which appear to have been the external defensive radii of some fish, and to have been used in the same manner with similar bones of the Balistes tribe. Their shape will be seen by a reference to Plate IV. figs. 1 and 2. They are longitudinally grooved from the apex P to C, which appears to have been the part that protruded out of the body of the fish; and from C to D, the part imbedded in the body, the bone is hollow, as will be seen by the section of fig. 1 at b, represented fig. 3. This bone is armed from the apex P to a, figs. 1 and 2, with teeth-like bony processes in two rows, placed so as to give a zigzag appearance. I possess specimens in which several of these bones are placed side by side; and it might be inferred from this circumstance, that the fish had many of them. The only bones occurring in contact with this fossil, are some which resemble palates or teeth. Figs. 4 and 5 are two varieties which are rare; fig. 6 is the most common: all these are mixed with the above-described fin-bones, in a mass of lias which I have in my possession.
There is a variety of this bone which differs from figures 1 and 2, only in being much narrower, and covered with tubercles instead of longitudinal grooves.
Figs. 1 and 2, Plate V. represent the side and front views of a very rare fossil, which appears to belong to the class of the above-mentioned bones. The curved teeth-like processes are placed in the same zigzag manner, but they are larger in proportion, and separated from each other; there is a single row at the bottom, of the same size as those at top. The two sides of this fossil are covered with small tubercles. This bone is not at all curved.
These fin-bones,—with palates, and a rough thin and bony substance, studded with minute tubercles,—are the only remains of the animal that have till lately been noticed. But an upper and lower jaw, probably belonging to the same animal, have recently been found containing triple rows of teeth. There are in the collection of Colonel Birch two specimens, which show the position of these teeth and the shape of the mouth. Fig. 3. Plate V. exhibits one of the jaws, armed with a triple row of teeth, placed in a manner similar to those of sharks; both jaws being equally armed. In one of the specimens there are four rows of teeth, placed with regard to each other as represented in fig. 4. To the localities of the fossil radii I have to add the Oxford clay, in the vicinity of Oxford and Weymouth, and the same clay at the Vaches Noires Cliffs, between Dives and Villers sur Mer, in the department of Calvados, on the opposite coast of France. Professor Buckland has found them also in coral rag and Kimmeridge clay, at Heddington near Oxford.
The fin-bones vary in length from six to twenty inches: one in my collection measures eighteen inches and a half.
The lias of Lyme contains also various other fossils, among which may be enumerated the following:
  A fish remarkable for having rectangular scales, which is much compressed, seldom more than a quarter of an inch thick, most commonly not exceeding one-eighth. It is a very beautiful fossil, from the jet-black lustre of the scales: when the fish is fractured, the vertebra? and ribs may be discovered on the inside; the pectoral fins are in general finely preserved. Plate VI. fig. 1, represents one of these fish tolerably perfect; the bones of the skull, however, are not well preserved. I am indebted to my friend Dr. Leach for the following name and description.
DAPEDIUM.
The interior of the mouth of one of these fish is represented PI. VI. fig. 2, and two teeth fig. 3. From one of the short sides of the rectangular scales there is a triangular projection, which fits into a corresponding depression in the scale adjoining it (fig. 4); on the outside of the fish this projection is not visible, the interior part only of the scales being thus provided. These fossils are by no means common: they vary from seven to eighteen or twenty inches in length.
Tiiere is another fossil fish, longer considerably in comparison with its breadth than the preceding: the scales are not rectangular except towards the head. These fish are found much compressed, seldom exceeding the thickness of drawing-paper. A specimen of this kind represented Plate VII. fig. 1, is much broader in proportion to its length than those usually found; they are generally of uniform size, seldom exceeding six or seven inches in length.
Fine specimens of pentacrinite occur in seams parallel to the strata of the lias, at Golden Cap Hill.
Fossil wood also is obtained in great variety: there is one kind with a long trunk and branches much compressed, in the marly strata, which is black, splits into small parallelopipeds, is light, and burns with a bright flame and unpleasant smell; the other kinds are generally found in the hard lias limestone, are not compressed, are much knotted, and very compact.
Fossil ferns are but of rare occurrence in the lias near Lyme. The two specimens represented Plate VII. figs. 2. and 3, are from the collection of Professor Buckland, and were obtained from the lias of Axminster: fig. 2 being from the white, and fig. 3 from blue lias.
Many varieties of Ammonites are found also at Lyme, the most perfect occurring in the hard lias limestone or in nodules in the marly strata: these nodules are frequently spherical, and of large size. Among the Ammonites are the following:

  RED MARL, SANDSTONE, AND CONGLOMERATE. 
This formation occupies a large portion of the coast of Devonshire; it first appears, on the part of the coast now under consideration, beneath Dowlands near Axmouth, rising from below lias; it forms some low cliffs near Seaton, and from thence, with the exception of White Cliff and Beer Head, it constitutes the lower part of all the cliffs to High Peak, on the west of Sidmouth: proceeding westward, it forms the entire cliffs as far as Babbacombe Bay, where it rests upon limestone. The conglomerate at Teignmouth includes large rounded masses of porphyry, from a few inches to two or three feet in diameter: and between Teignmouth and Babbacombe Bay it contains small pebbles, of the same limestone which it rests upon at the latter place.
  It will be seen, by reference to the section, that this coast presents two striking examples of the almost sudden termination of strata, close to points where they attain a thickness which is very considerable. At its eastern extremity, the beds of the oolite formation, the thickness of which exceeds three hundred feet, and which at Down Cliff are interposed between the lias and green sand, entirely vanish before they reach the cliff of Golden Cap; and the lias itself, which is from three to four hundred feet thick between Charmouth and Lyme, is, together with the oolite, totally wanting between the green sand and red marl at Axmouth Point. It unfortunately happens, from the covered state of the cliff to the east of this point, and the occurrence of the valley of Seaton between Down Cliff and Golden Cap, that it is not possible to discover the exact place and manner in which these formations originally terminated,— whether suddenly by an abrupt escarpment in the midst of their full thickness, or gradually by thinning off to the point at which they totally cease.
The fault on the sea-shore between Ware Cliffs and Pinhay, is a case of dislocation affecting the lias, similar to those which are seen to advantage at the Old Passage near Bristol.


