THE bay included between Cap d'Antifer to the east, and the Pointe de Barflcur on the west, is about sixty English miles in breadth: it is formed by part of the coast of the department of the Seine Inferieure, the whole coast of that of Calvados, and the eastern part of the coast of La Manche.
The shore of the department of the Seine Inferieure is bold; generally from four to five hundred feet in heightf; and it is intersected by narrow valleys, which do not in general run far inland. This line of high bold coast ends near Cap la Hcve. The right bank of the Seine, for many miles into the interior, is, with the exception of the low land between Havre and Harfleur, high and perpendicular: the left bank, from Villcrville sur Mer\ till about eleven miles cast from Honfleur, is formed by high hills, which present at their bases either low cliffs or alluvial plains. The remainder of the left bank of the Seine is precipitous.
From Henqueville to Dives the coast is hilly, with the exception of two flat sandy plains; one about a mile in length, between the river Toucques and Benervillc Hill; the other, three miles long, between Bcnervillc Hill and Villers sur Mer. This hilly country is separated from the low land of the environs of Caen by a line passing from the mouth of the river Dives, in a south-east direction, through Etreez.
From Dives to St. Come, about twenty miles distant, the coast is in general flat and sandy; there are however some low cliffs, ten or fifteen feet in height, near Lyon sur Mer and Luc. The country rises into hills near St. Come; and the cliffs, which commence a little to the westward of the village, continue nearly to Grand Camp, where the shore is again sandy and flat. This flat and sandy coast extends nearly to Carentan, backed however by low hills at the point of land which separates the marshy flat of Carentan from the mouth of the Vire.
From near Carentan to St. Vaast (about twenty miles) there are no cliffs; a marshy flat, which varies in breadth from a quarter of a mile to a mile and a half, separates the hilly country from the sandy dunes, which here form the shore.
The coast, for some distance to the north of St. Vaast towards Barfleur, is formed by a low granite plain, covered in a great measure with sand near the sea. The hills, which back the flat coast between Fontenay and St. Vaast, are of considerable elevation.
Such is the physical appearance of the coast. I shall now proceed to detail its geological characters, beginning with the upper rocks.
  CHALK. 
The cliffs from Fecamp to Cap d'Antifer are composed of chalk with flints, containing the same fossils as in England. From Cap d'Antifer to the Chateau d'Orchet, within the mouth of the Seine, the upper part only of the cliff is chalk, the lower being green sand. At the latter place the green sand disappears, and the chalk again forms the entire cliffs, but near its junction with the green sand, contains particles of that substance.
The portion of the department of the Seine Inferieure bounded by the seacoast, the river Seine, and a straight line drawn from Fecamp to Caudebec, is composed of chalk, covered generally by flint gravel. The chalk abounds in flints, which sometimes form seams of three or four inches in thickness.
  On the left bank of the Seine also the chalk caps the hills at Fiquefleur, at Honfleur, and at Henqueville, resting upon green sand.
  It would be difficult to give a correct idea of the line of hills capped by chalk, on the outskirts of the great chalk formation, without a good physical map of this part of France, which I believe does not exist. The main body of chalk may be said to cross the Seine between Honfleur and Fiquefleur, and to be continued in a line, passing about midway between Pont Audemer and Pont l'Eveque; whence passing to the west of Cormeilles, it crosses the road from Lisieux to Paris, in a south-east direction, between L'Hotellerie and Duranville.
The chalk throughout this tract, which forms a high table land, is for the most part concealed by flint gravel, generally angular, and sometimes forming beds exceeding one hundred feet in thickness.
The valley of the Rille, from Pont Audemer to Brionne, affords a distinct section of the chalk with its thick coating of gravel beds. At Brionne this rock contains very few flints, and it is equally destitute of them at Cormeilles, on the banks of the river Calone. The strata of the whole body of chalk have a gentle inclination to the E.N.E. The surface occasionally presents great inequalities, assuming the form of pyramids or neediest, &c.
  GREEN SAND, AND IRON SAND. 
Green sand appears under the chalk at Cap d'Antifer, and forms the lower part of the cliffs as far as Cauville, where marl, containing green earth, may be observed under it. From thence to Cap la Heve the shore is encumbered by fallen masses of chalk and green sand. At Cap la Heve this thin marl bed is again seen beneath the green sand. It rests upon iron sand, containing mica and siliceous grains, which are sometimes as large as peas; and this again upon blue marl and marlstone.
Between Cap d'Antifer and Cauville the green sand contains numerous Alcyonia, several varieties of Echini, Ostrea crista-galli (Parkinson), Turrilites costata^, Ammonites Goodhallii, &c. At the Vaches Noires it abounds with fossils, one of the most remarkable of which is, the Hallirhoa costata of M. Lamouroux.
  At Henqueville Cliff, on the south of the Seine, the green sand is again found between the chalk and the blue marl and marlstone: I did not observe any iron sand at that place.
  To the westward of Henqueville, the next hill., at Benerville, has no green sand, its summit being formed of coral rag: but the cliff between Villers sur Mer and Dives, usually called the Vaches Noires, is capped by it; the green sand resting partly upon coral rag, and partly upon beds of oolite, above a thick blue clay (Oxford clay).
The green sand formation does not appear upon the coast to the west of the Vaches Noires, but it extends inland along the upper part of the hills from Trouville sur Mer. Along this tract however it loses the usual character of this bed, the prevailing rock being a loose siliceous sand with nodules of blue limestone or chert disposed in layers. At the subterranean quarries near Lisieux, a shaft is cut through this rock to a thick bed of whitish soft calcareous sandstone, under which is another bed of siliceous sandstone with nodules of limestone and chert; the whole rests upon oolite, as may be seen at the bottom of the valley between Lisieux and Glos. Near the latter place there is a quarry, at the top of which a loose siliceous and ferruginous sand presents itself, containing large nodules of gray siliceous sandstone; to this succeeds siliceous sandstone containing organic remains; then a stratum, nine inches thick, of compact gray limestone; and under it a siliceous sandstone bed, which rests upon a large-grained oolite.
The hilly country, comprehended between the chalk district and a line drawn south-east from Dives to Etreez, is composed of green sand, resting either upon the marl and marlstone which forms the base of Cap la Heve, or upon some member of the oolite formation. But many beds of the green sand formation, which occur inland, do not extend to the coast.
  BLUE MARL AND MARLSTONE. 
This formation, which has been mistaken for lias, from its general resemblance to that rock,contains fossil crocodilesf at Havre,and near Cap la Heve a bed of oysters. These, with the exception of an imperfect cast of an univalve, and another of a bivalve, were all the organic remains that I observed in it. It is first seen at Cap la HeVe dipping gently to the east: and it forms the flat upon which Havre is built. At Honfleur it may occasionally be discovered amid the fallen masses of chalk and green sand; and at Henqueville it forms a bed a hundred and fifty feet thick interposed between green sand and oolite, but it is not seen further to the west.

  OOLITE FORMATION. 
  I include under this head the series of rocks, which begins with the Portland beds, and ends with the inferior oolite.
  Portland Beds.—At Henqueville cliff may be traced thin beds of a hard yellowish-white limestone, which contain seams and nodules of chert, and casts of fossil shells, the same with those which are observable in the Portland beds; these rest upon coral rag. They are however much concealed by the fall of the superincumbent beds; and I was not fortunate enough to meet with them in the interior.
  Coral Rag.—This rock, accompanied by calcareous grit, first appears on the east of Henqueville cliff, of which it forms the lower part. Proceeding westward, it forms the top of the hill between the river Toucques and Benerville, and thins off upon the eastern part of the Vaches Noires cliffs. Near Villers sur Mer it contains a vast quantity of corals and Echini.
Oolite and Blue Clay.—The latter is first seen on the coast forming the lower part of the hill between the Toucques and Benerville. Inj this place the beds of calcareous sandstone and oolite, which are to be seen between the coral rag and blue clay at the next hill to the westward (the Vaches Noires cliffs), are not exposed to view; but as the summit of the hill is composed of coral rag, there can be little doubt of their existence.
The Vaches Noires cliffs afford an excellent section of these rocks. The coral rag and calcareous grit thin off, as before stated, on the east: under these is found a whitish marl; then a bed of oolite about four feet thick; then blue marl or clay. This last is about three hundred feet in thickness, and agrees in its geological position with the Oxford clay: it contains septaria, and a few thin beds of grayish limestone; and among its fossils are the following:—
This blue clay forms the whole of the hill to the west of the Vaches Noires, after which it is seen no more on the coast; but the base of the hills, extending in a south-east direction from Dives to Etreez, is composed of it. The hill rising eastward of Etreez affords the same section as the west end of the Vaches Noires cliffs.
The low sandy coast which succeeds, to the westward of the hills at Dives, conceals the rock upon which the blue clay of the Vaches Noires rests. The best section that I obtained in illustration of the order of the beds, was on the road from Caen to Etreez, where the blue clay rests upon a yellowish calcareous sand with sandstone, in alternating layers (cornbrash). The clay appears to form the bed of the Dives river, to the westward of which is a low chain, running south-east parallel to the high range, and principally composed of blue clay, or of calcareous sand and sandstone. West of the low range the country is nearly level to Caen.
  Cornbrash.—Of this I observed but little. The hill behind Moull, on the road from Caen to Lisieux, is composed of a yellow calcareous sand and sandstone resembling cornbrash, upon which the blue clay (Oxford clay) appears to rest; and the latter is afterwards met with on the road to Etreez. The hard strata are quarried at Moull.
  No cornbrash limestone appears on the coast: the part at which it ought to occur, between Dives and Sallenelles, is concealed by sand and marsh-land.
  Forest Marble.—Beneath the calcareous sand and sandstone, and above the freestone of Caen, is a calcareous rock, sometimes rather oolitic, composed in a great measure of broken shells, and containing very small fossil corals; from which last circumstance it has obtained from M. Lamouroux, in his Exposition Methodique des Polypiers, the name of Calcaire Polypier. In geological position and structure this limestone resembles the forest marble. It occurs in the low cliffs at Luc and Lion, and probably along the whole coast from Sallenelles to St. Come, though hid under the dunes. It appears likewise inland, between the range of Caen freestones and the low hills to the eastward; and at Cagny, on the road from Caen to Moull, there are quarries of this rock; as also at Bonneville, two leagues from Caen on the road to Troarn.
  Caen Freestones.—These beds occupy the same geological position with the freestones of Bath; they are not however oolitic, but sandy. When first quarried they are friable and soft, but become harder by exposure to the atmosphere. The beds are not observable on the coast, and from the general flatness of the country the line of separation between them and the rocks above and below is rather difficult to trace. The principal quarries are in the neighbourhood of Caen, and along the banks of the Orne from that town to Sallenelles. The freestones of Caen were, as is well known, formerly much used in England.
  On the road from Caen to Bayeux the freestone beds may be traced in continuity as far as St. Croix: they extend, on the road from Caen to Villers, nearly to Tourville; on the road from Caen to Conde sur Noireau, to Fontenay; and on that from Caen to Falaise nearly to the latter town; for I am disposed to consider the quarries at St. Pierre and Aubigny as the lower of these beds.
  In that part of the department of Calvados which is principally composed of these beds, older rocks frequently present themselves. The country on the road from Caen to Falaise is composed of the freestone beds as far as Cintaux, where suddenly, without any difference in the level of the surface, a compact siliceous sandstone rises from under them, which continues nearly to Langannerie; from thence the calcareous beds continue to Potigny, where a small area is again occupied by a bed of quartz rock.
  On the road from Caen to Villers argillaceous slate and quartz rock are disclosed by denudation at Tourville; and at May, on the road from Caen to Conde sur Noireau, there is a denudation of a sandstone that has much the appearance of old red sandstone.
  Inferior Oolite.—In the department of Calvados, the remarkable bed of this rock with ferruginous grains, is accompanied, both above and beneath, by a calcareous sandstone, varying in colour from yellow to white, and containing seams and nodules of chert and flint.
  I have not observed this bed with ferruginous grains on the coast; but the calcareous sandstone with cherty seams caps the lias cliffs from St. Come to St. Laurent. From St. Come to St. Honorine the beds rise gradually to the westward; but at the latter place the strata dip to the N.N.W. and in consequence the lias is soon lost under the sea; and the cliffs from Vierville to Grand Camp are composed almost entirely of the calcareous sandstone with seams of chert.
The inferior oolite may be traced inland from between Maisy and Isigny, south-eastward, to a small hamlet (on the southern margin of the map) between Falaise and Pont d'Ouilly: the line of junction with the older rocks winds considerably. The oolitic strata rest upon lias from between Maisy and Isigny to within a short distance from Bayeux. At Veaucelle, near the latter town, they repose upon quartzose gravel beds of the new red sandstone formation; the bed with ferruginous grains is here seen accompanied by calcareous sandstone, containing seams of flint, and it also appears in some quarries about a mile north-east from Bayeux; but the flint occurs there not in seams but in rounded nodules.
This bed with ferruginous grains contains an abundance of fossils, almost entirely resembling those found in the same rock in the south-western parts of England, particularly at Dundry Hill, near Bristol. Among those which I obtained at Bayeux were the following:—
From Bayeux to about three or four miles eastward of Villers the inferior oolite rests upon lias; from thence to Croisy (a little hamlet on the road from Conde sur Noireau to Caen) it rests upon argillaceous slate and grauwacke. At Croisy the rocks of this formation are remarkably white, so that the calcareous beds with flints very much resemble chalk. The appearance is more striking, from the flints being black and disposed in regular layers; they have not, however, such irregular shapes as the true chalk flints. Even the bed with ferruginous grains, which is here exposed between the other beds, has, in one of the quarries, a white base. Its fossils agree with those in the same bed at Bayeux.
From Croisy, in a S.S.E. direction, to a small hamlet on the road from Falaise to Pont d'Ouilly, the inferior oolite beds rest upon argillaceous slate and grauwacke.
The beds of the inferior oolite may in general be traced by a superficial bed of unrolled angular gravel, composed either of flint or chert; as the one or the other predominates in the oolitic beds of the vicinity. This is particularly remarkable upon the edges of the beds where they rest upon the slate: and on the road from Falaise to Pont d'Ouilly the slate itself is, in several places on the high ground, covered by this kind of gravel, the debris most probably of the inferior oolite beds which once rested upon it. There is a great deal of this gravel between the little hamlet of St. Basille and Tilly sur Seule.
  At St. Laurent de Condel a red porphyritic conglomerate is exposed by the removal of the inferior oolite, which appears at one time to have covered it. The quartz rock and slate of Falaise are also disclosed by a denudation among the same beds; and there may be many other instances of denudation on the outskirts of the slate hills.
  LIAS. 
The lias first appears eastward on the coast of the department of Calvados, between St. Come and Arromanche, under the calcareous sandstone with chert seams above described; from thence to St. Honorine it forms the lower part of the cliffs, gradually rising to the west. At St. Honorine this stratum forms a great curve, and, dipping N.N.W., disappears on the shore to the west of St. Laurent. Near Port it extends to some distance inland, and at the Fosse du Souci, about half a league from that place, the rivers Drome and Aure find a subterraneous passage through it; reappearing on the coast near Port en Bessin, in the form of large springs or fountains.
The boundary of the lias in the department of Calvados will be best understood by reference to the accompanying map, as the lines which separate it from the rocks above and beneath wind very considerably. Its general direction is south-east from Isigny to ViUers. It is extensively quarried along the line that separates it from the older rocks, being much used for agricultural and other purposes. It rests upon the new red sandstone formation from Isigny to Villers, and, eastward of the latter place, a small portion is to be traced resting upon argillaceous slate, until it is hid under the inferior oolite.
Lias, reposing upon new red sandstone, forms the northern part of the point of land between Carentan and Isigny, and is there separated from the sea by a marshy and sandy flat. From the vicinity of Carentan to Fontenay it forms the elevated ground behind the marshy flat which there also separates the hills from the sea, and extends a considerable distance into the interior of this part of the department of La Manche.
Blue lias occurs at Ivetot, about three-quarters of a league from Valognes, on the road to Briequebec, under a calcareous rock to be mentioned hereafter. It is probable that from the vicinity of Carentan nearly to Montebourg it rests upon the new red sandstone formation; and it does so between Lestre and Montebourg, and at Negreville, on the road from Valognes to Briequebec. At Brevans, north-east of Carentan, it occurs above red sandstone. From near Bayeux to Villers it rests upon beds of quartz gravel.
The lias of this part of France exactly resembles that of the south of England; containing, as in England, an abundance of the Gryphsea incurva and Plagiostoma gigantea, with ammonites and belemnites. I have little doubt, from the information of the quarrymen, that the remains of the Ichthyosaurus are occasionally found in it, particularly at Brevans.
The white and blue strata are in general much intermixed: between Port en Bessin and St. Honorine white lias of considerable thickness forms the base of the cliff.
There is a fault in the lias west of Port en Bessin, which runs across two small headlands.
  NEW RED SANDSTONE FORMATION. 
  NO member of this formation appears on the coast within the tract at present under consideration, with the exception of some quartzose gravel beds near Lestre (departement de la Manche), which are however separated by a marshy and sandy flat from the sea.
In the department of Calvados there is very little new red sandstone or red marl, except in the neighbourhood of Lison, where the elevated ground upon which the forest stands is composed of both. From Lison towards Isigny there is much red marl mixed with the gravel beds, and the same rock is seen also at the bridge over the Vire near Isigny.
Gravel formed of rounded quartz pebbles is in Calvados the principal member of this formation: it is associated with sand, generally whitish, seldom red, and occasionally with red marl; the pebbles are rarely cemented, as in the new red sandstone conglomerate of the coast of Devonshire.
  In the department of La Manche the new red sandstone formation occurs abundantly in the neighbourhood, and to the east and south-east of Carentan; the road from St. Lo to the latter place affording a good section. It rests, near St. Jean Day, upon argillaceous slate; thence to Carentan the country is composed of red marl and red sandstone, mixed with the usual blue and white strata.
The gravel beds so common in the department of Calvados are more rare in this part of the department of La Manche.
Near Brevans and Cats, on the point of land between Isigny and Carentan, the new red sandstone is yellowish, mixed with red and grey, and is tolerably compact. From Carentan to- Sainteny, and towards Beaute, beds of gravel and sand occur; but the sand is seldom red.
The gravel beds above mentioned occur between Lestre and Montebourg. From Valognes, on the road to St. Vaast, the gravel beds, red marl, and red sandstone, form the country as far as a little hamlet on the river Sinope, where the sandstone is seen to rest upon argillaceous slate. On the top of the next hill towards St. Vaast, gravel beds, altogether about thirty feet in thickness, rest upon porphyritic conglomerate and argillaceous slate; and the same thing occurs at two or three other places further on the road.
  In the department of Calvados this formation rests upon argillaceous slate and grauwacke; except at Lilry, where it rests upon coal measures. In the department of La Manche, at Lestre, Montebourg, and in the neighbourhood of Valognes, it rests upon quartz rock; of which substance the gravel beds so often mentioned are in fact principally, if not wholly, composed. This may also be the case (though concealed by lias and the oolites) in the department of Calvados, where the quartzose gravel is most abundant. That the quartz rock occurs beneath the red sandstone formation, is seen at the several denudations.
  PORPHYRITIC CONGLOMERATE. 
This rock constitutes the summit of the Bruyere deCrecy, a mountain near Conde sur Noireau; It is composed of rounded quartz nodules, varying in size from that of a pea to three or four inches in diameter, and agglutinated by a hard red argillo-siliceous cement, in which are small crystals of felspar. I did not perceive that it was stratified: it appears to rest upon nearly vertical strata of argillaceous slate and grauwacke.
  A similar rock occurs at St. Laurent de Condel on the same road, under oolite, and is exposed to view in one part of the high ground between Valognes and St. Vaast, though generally concealed by the gravel beds. This porphyritic conglomerate bears a striking resemblance to that which occurs under the same circumstances in the neighbourhood of Exeter.
  COAL MEASURES. 
These strata are found at Litry, E.S.E. of Bayeux, extending about 1700 yards from east to west, and 850 yards from north to south; their direction is east and west, and their dip 22° to the north. Some of the coal beds are of tolerable thickness; they vary much in quality, and are not in general very good. They rest upon argillaceous slate.
  OLD RED SANDSTONE. 
  I am inclined to refer to this formation the compact sandstone found at May, between Caen and St. Laurent de Condel. It rests upon what is usually termed transition limestone, and with it is exposed to view by a large denudation in the oolite formation. This sandstone is either white, red, or blueish; its beds vary in thickness, and are sometimes micaceous; their dip is about 45° to the north; they are extensively wrought for paving and flag stones.
The sandstone which rests on quartz rock between Cintaux and Langannerie, on the road from Caen to Falaise, may be a continuation of the May beds.
  COMPACT LIMESTONE WITH SLATE. 
  A small portion of these substances occurs under the sandstone near May; the limestone is very compact, and in beds two or three feet thick, between which are thin beds of slate. I did not observe any organic remains in it; but the whole had the appearance of what is usually termed transition limestone. I understand that it was formerly quarried as marble, for which it is well adapted.
QUARTZ ROCK
The quartz rock, in the departments of Calvados and La Manche, varies from red to whitish-grey and white: it is difficult to obtain specimens, owing to its toughness. It occurs generally in the form of a sandstone, but passes in some instances into quartz; and is found in beds from two to eight feet in thickness, sometimes rather contorted, and frequently traversed by veins of quartz. The quartz rock of the department of La Manche is described at length by M. Brongniart in his memoir on the Cotentin, and named by him Quartz grenuf. The rocks exposed by the denudations in the oolite formation, in the department of Calvados, are formed either wholly or in part of quartz.
  At Grouvy, a short distance from Langannerie already mentioned, this substance forms rough and precipitous ground, which rises above a small river: the colour of the rock varies from grey to red; the beds are from two to four feet thick, and dip at about an angle of 80° to the south. Among them is a bed of iron ore about two feet thick, having the same dip and direction as the rest: and when I was there, several heaps of it had been collected, but I am not aware that it has as yet been smelted. These quartz beds continue to Urville.
  At Potigny, on the road from Caen to Falaise, the same rock is exposed by denudation, at the entrance of the village, in beds which are highly inclined, and covered by horizontal strata of oolite.
The eminence upon which stands the castle at Falaise (the birth-place of William the Conqueror), and the picturesque cliff opposite to it, are composed of very compact quartz rock. Upon the top of the hill leading out of Falaise, on the road to Conde sur Noireau, similar beds occur: they are separated from those on which the castle stands by argillaceous slate.
Between Tourville and Mondrainville, on the road from Caen to Villers, argillaceous slate and grauwacke rest upon quartz rock: the beds all dip at an angle of about 45° or 50° to the north, and form part of a space exposed by a denudation in the oolite formation. The relative position of the quartz rock and argillaceous slate between Mondrainville and Tourville and at Falaise, would lead to the conclusion that they alternate here, as they do between Valognes and Cherbourg. The general character of the slate is well displayed at the mountain of Le Roule behind the last-mentioned town; where it varies from red to grey, the grey being often as compact as quartz; the beds are sometimes several feet in thickness, and frequently curved; their dip is between 45° and 50° to the north observed in the quartz rock of Le Roule the cylindrical bodies mentioned by Dr. McCuUoch as occurring in the quartz rock of Glen Tilt. On that part of the hill over which the road to Valognes passes, about a league and a half from that place, the quartz rock alternates with argillaceous slate.
There is much quartz rock in the vicinity of the latter town; it constitutes the high hill between Valognes and Montebourg; on the top its beds are nearly white. At the high hill between Lestre and Montebourg, which is also composed of it, the beds are mostly grey, sometimes red; they vary considerably in thickness, and dip to the east at about an angle of 45°; the same beds continue to Greneville (on the coast between St. Vaast and Lestre), where they probably rest upon argillaceous slate.
Near Negreville, on the road from Valognes to Briequebec, and from thence to the latter town, a series of rocks occurs, which may generally be referred to quartz rock, but which, in part, very much resemble old red sandstone, being micaceous, and of the usual colours and character of that rock: this sandstone (if really such, and not a variety of quartz rock) either alternates with or passes into quartz rock.
The direction of the beds near Negreville is from E.N.E. to W.S. W.; their dip is to the E.S. E. at about an angle of 80°.
  At the mountain of Le Roule, and at the high ground between Lestre and Montebourg, thin beds of sandstone, which are in general red, slaty, and not very compact, occur in the quartz rock.
  ARGILLACEOUS SLATE AND GRAUWACKE. 
  A considerable portion of the south-western part of the department of Calvados is formed of these rocks, which are continued into the department of La Manche. Their boundary line would pass nearly west from the neighbourhood of Perriers to Litry, thence S.E. to Villers, and thence E.S.E. to Croisy, from whence it passes S.E., and crosses the road from Pont d'Ouilly to Falaise at a little hamlet half way between the two places.
The grauwacke, though not very abundant, may be observed in several places: at the little hamlet last mentioned it is visible in beds among the slate, which are highly inclined, and have a direction about east and west.
From Conde sur Noireau to the Bruyere de Crecy the slate is disposed vertically in an east and west direction; grauwacke is observable on the northern side of the latter, and may occasionally be seen among the slate from thence to Croisy; the beds are sometimes curved; their general dip is at an angle of about 45° to the north.
  At Jurigny this slate forms a small tract of country which is surrounded by quartzose gravel beds of the new red sandstone formation.
The slate near St. Lo is precisely that of the country round Conde sur Noireau, Pont d'Ouilly, Villers, &c, and is accompanied occasionally by grauwacke.
The slate of the north of LA Manche appears to be the same as that in Calvados; near Cherbourg and Valognes, and in the denudations at Falaise and Tourville near Caen, it is associated with quartz rock, which, as well as the slate, is alike at both places.
Near St. Vaastthe slate hills end suddenly upon the low granite plain which extends towards Barfleur. The slate hills on the south-west of Calvados and the adjoining portion of La Manche attain considerable elevation.
  GRANITE. 
The granite that comes within the scope of the present communication, is that which is seen a little above high-water mark at St. Vaast and Reville (department of La Manche), and forms a plain at the termination of the slate hills. The granite of Reville generally resembles that of Dartmoor; and, like it, occasionally contains crystals of felspar as much as two inches in length. This granite varies from grey to a light red tint, according to the colour of the felspar. I saw no other extraneous mineral in it but tourmaline in small crystals, and even these were rare.
The granite of the coast near Reville splits in two directions; one east and west, the other north and south; and forms large rhomboidal blocks: some few groups of granite rocks on the shore are split into similar blocks, which have not the same direction.
The granite at St. Vaast and the opposite island of Tatihou is somewhat different from that of ReviUe, though evidently in connection with it; it is split into similar blocks, and the fissures are in the same direction with those at Reville; in both places it is traversed by granite veins, of which the predominant ingredient is flesh-coloured felspar.
  At high water the granite near Reville is only seen here and there, being nearly covered up by sea sand; but at low water it is more exposed to view. Near Reville a little gneiss may be observed on the beach.
Grey granite occurs at St. Honorine, a short distance S.E. from Conde sur Noireau (department of Calvados); probably part of the same bed that is found in the neighbourhood of Vire.
  In addition to the rocks already noticed in the present paper, is one which ought properly to have been placed before the chalk, as it most probably belongs to the tertiary formation. It occurs at Freuville, between Valognes and Carentan, and consists of a tolerably hard light-coloured limestone, containing an abundance of fossil shells, particularly bacculites. I observed it only at one quarry near the village, and I imagine that it rests upon lias, which occupies the surrounding country.
Another limestone, about the place,of which in the series I was not altogether satisfied, is found at Valognes: its boundaries and fossils have been ably described by M. de Gerville J. It is of a light colour, contains many fossils, and extends from Ivetot, in a northern direction, to St. Germain.
  At St. Laurent on the coast of Calvados there is a submarine forest upon lias clay, where the remains of trees are very numerous; and there are also traces of another on the Vaches Noires clay, between Benerville and Villers sur Mer. In neither of these instances can any subsidence be discovered or surmised.
  It will be seen from the preceding observations that, with the exception of quartz rock, the rocks described in this communication nearly correspond in position, structure, and organic remains, with those found in the southern parts of England; of which they are most probably the continuation. The chalk which forms the coast of the department of the Seine Inferieure seems to be a prolongation of that of the Isle of Wight and Dorsetshire. The same maybe said of the green sand ;—which in Devon and Dorset covers in succession oolite, lias, and new red sandstone, the intermediate rocks being wanting; and which in Calvados rests in succession upon several members of the oolite formation. The oolites and lias of Calvados are probably the same as those of Weymouth, Bridport, and Lyme. The new red sandstone of Calvados and La Manche agrees in position, though not always in appearance, with the same rock in Devon. The porphyritic conglomerate of the Bruyere de Crecy and St. Laurent de Condel bear a striking resemblance to that near Exeter; and the slate of Calvados and La Manche is probably prolonged into Devonshire.
The incorrectness of the once popular notion that England has been torn from France by some sudden violence, has already been exposed by Mr. W. Phillips and others. It is much more reasonable to suppose that the bed of the English channel was formed at the same time, and in the same manner, with those differences of level which are observable every where on dry land. The depression that forms the bed of the English channel is very trifling in proportion to its extent of surface; and is very much exceeded in depth by the large continental lakes. The greatest observed depth of water at the western extremity of the channel, between the Land's End and Ushant, is only seventy fathoms, the distance between the two places being about thirty leaguesf; whereas the Lake of Geneva is nearly double that depth between Lausanne and Evian, the distance between the two latter places being only about three leagues. The greatest depth of water in the narrowest part of the channel, between Dover and Cap Blanc Nez, is thirty fathoms, the distance six leagues; and between Cap La Hogue and the Isle of Portland, a distance of about sixteen leagues, the depth of water is only forty-five fathoms, or two hundred and seventy feet.


