 
  MY DEAR SIR, 
I HAVE many apologies to offer, for not having earlier fulfilled a promise I made you when last in Edinburgh, of examining into the circumstances which attended the transportation of the Travelled Stone near Castle-Stuart, in Inverness-shire; and of satisfying that curiosity which I appeared to have awakened in your mind, by the imperfect account I was at that time enabled to give you of it from report; by transmitting to you a more accurate and particular detail of the phenomena accompanying that event, from my own personal research. It was on this very day of last year, that I had an opportunity of visiting the spot; and now, without trespassing on your patience by an enumeration of the various sources of procrastination which have produced so considerable a delay between the period of my investigation, and my present communication, I shall proceed to offer you the result of my inquiries and remarks made on the spot.
This stone is a large mass of conglomerate, being a concretion composed of distinct irregular fragments of granite, gneiss, quartz, and other rocks of the primitive series, cemented together by a highly indurated and ferruginous claystone. It is, apparently the very same conglomerate, as that forming the rocks through which the romantic burn of Cawdor cuts its deep and narrow bed, near Cawdor Castle in Nairnshire; nor am I aware, that any rock of the same nature with that of the Travelled Stone, exists much nearer to it than seven or eight miles. Its present situation is on the sands, in the little bay near Castle-Stuart, on the Moray Firth; and as it is left entirely dry by every retreating tide, the sea retiring a great way beyond it, it is easily approached over the sands at low-water. Its size is very considerable; being, as near as I could guess, above five feet high at its most elevated point, calculating from the surface of the sand, and being, to all appearance, about one foot imbedded in it. In its two horizontal diameters, it may probably measure between five and six feet one way, by six or seven the other. Its shape, which is very particular, is peculiarly well adapted to admit of the mode of transportation it underwent, as it has a projecting ledge running all around it, (marked AA. in the accompanying pen-and-ink sketch), the lower edge of which is above a foot in perpendicular height from the surface of the sand; and from this edge downwards, the stone is suddenly bevelled off, in a form something resembling that part of the bottom of a boat which is under the belly, and approaching the keel. The upper surface of the stone is gradually rounded into a ridge, rising into a peak towards the one extremity. The annexed sketch, taken from the south-side, will give a tolerable idea of this mass,which, on a rough calculation, (formed by weighing about a square inch of the stone), may weigh about eight tons.
This large mass is remarkable, for having been removed from a situation which it formerly occupied, about 260 yards farther to the E. S. E. by natural means, and in the course of one night, to the position where it now stands. It had formerly served as a boundary stone (or as it is called in Scotland, a march-stone) between the properties of Castle-Stuart and Culloden; the former belonging to the Earl of Moray, and the latter to Duncan Forbes, Esq. As it is too ponderous to have been moved by human power, at least in that part of the country, it must have been originally deposited in that, its first place of rest, by causes similiar to those which have covered whole countries with boulders, the nature of which bespeaks their having belonged to rocks nowhere existing in situ in their entire and native state, in the vicinity of their present place of repose. The stranger easily recognises the spot from which it was last removed, (just within flood-mark), it being marked by a wooden-post, which the two contiguous proprietors were under the necessity of erecting, in order to supply the place of the stone, and to serve as an object for defining the line of march. At the fishing village of Artirloss, situated on a point above a mile to the westward of the stone, I learned several particulars regarding its extraordinary migration; but it was recommended to me to call on the miller of the Sea-mill of Petty for a fuller detail of the facts, who, living much nearer the stone, and having had it constantly in his view for a long series of years, not only recollected every circumstance about it, but was the first person who, on the ensuing morning, noticed that it had been removed during the night.
  I lost no time, therefore, in visiting this old man, whose name is Alexander Macgillivray; and I was lucky enough to find him at home. His information on the subject, and his replies to my interrogatories, were in every respect perfectly distinct and satisfactory. He informed me, that this remarkable circumstance took place on the night between Friday the 19th and Saturday the 20th February, of the year 1799. There had been a long continued and severe frost; and the greater part of the little bay had been for some time covered with ice, which was probably formed there the more readily, owing to the quantity of fresh water from the stream running near to Castle-Stuart, emptying itself into this inlet of the sea in the immediate neighbourhood. The stone was by this means fast secured, by the ledge I have already described, being bound round by a vast cake of ice, of many yards in extent, which, being frozen hard under the projection (A A), must have produced an admirable mechanical means for its elevation, for which purpose it afforded an extensive raft. The miller told us he had measured some of this ice, and found it no less than 18 inches thick. The stone was thus surrounded, when the sea left it at its ebb, and the whole of the circumjacent sand was left covered by this extensive, solid, and unbroken glacier. It is evident, that as the sea began again to flow, this would be naturally enough buoyed up in some degree by the returning water insinuating itself underneath it. On the night between the 19th and 20th of February, already noticed, the tide, which happened to be remarkably high, was full about 12 o'clock. About this hour, the wind began to blow a hurricane, which the miller described as having been perfectly unparalleled in the memory of the oldest men living, accompanied at the same time by a furiously drifting snow. The old man stated, that this tremendous storm blew directly from Dolcross Castle, an ancient building conspicuously situated on the ridge of the country at some miles distance; and accordingly I found, on examination, that by placing myself at the stone, and looking at Dolcross, the post marking the former situation of the mass, appeared quite in the line between these two points, andon trying the bearing with a pocket-compass, I found that the direction of the wind must have been from the E. S. E., and that the straight line or furrow described by the stone in the course of its voyage across the sands, lay in a direction from E. S. E. to W. N. W.
When the old miller got up on the morning of Saturday the 20th, the storm, and the drifted snow, were such, that he could hardly make his way to his barns, though they are but a few yards distant from his dwelling-house. He found all his doors blockaded, and buried under the wreathes of snow, so much so indeed, that there was not the vestige of an entrance left to any of them, and the drift still continued to be so very violent, that he, and a boy who was with him, had nearly lost themselves in returning again to the dwelling-house. When the weather had moderated in some degree, and the storm and snowhad cleared away, so that he could see across the little bay, he remarked to his wife with much astonishment, and no inconsiderable alarm, and the good woman could hardly believe her eyes when she looked out and saw that it was in reality gone from the spot it had occupied the day preceding, and that it had been removed much nearer to the low-water mark, to the position where it now remains. General surprise and curiosity were now excited, which were no doubt mingled with various superstitious fancies, and the neighbours flocked out to see and examine the subject of so extraordinary a prodigy. To their astonishment, the hole in which it had been for so many ages embedded, still remained to mark distinctly its yesterday's site, whilst its track across the flat oozy sand was very perceptible, extending in a line all the way from its old to its new situation.
  In addition to these particulars, gathered from the miller of Petty, I have since understood from my friend Mr Brodie of Brodie, that he visited the stone either that day (the 20th) or the day after, when he found all these traces remaining quite apparent, and that an extensive cake of ice was still adhering to the stone being attached to its surrounding ledge.
  It is evident, that this vast mass of stone must have been so far rendered specifically lighter than the water, by the great cake of ice within which it was bound, and by which it was supported, as to be in some degree buoyed up; and that, whilst in this state, it was carried forward by the outgoing tide, assisted by the impelling force of a tremendous hurricane from the E. S. E. So very uncommon was the violence of this storm, that the 20th February 1799, is still called in the language of the country, " The Blowing Saturday."
  By the circumstances just detailed, we are furnished with a comparatively recent and perfectly well attested example of one mode by which large masses of detached rock may be carried to considerable distances. For, although the waters of the tide which fill the bay in question were, on account of their shallowness, incapable of buoying up the extensive float of ice supporting the stone, so perfectly as to prevent the keel of it from ploughing the sand in the course of its progress over it; yet there is no reason to doubt, that if it had been once fairly carried into deeper water, it might have been ultimately transported to a much greater distance. And if we can suppose the float of ice to have been sufficiently tough and tenacious, we may even conceive it possible that the stone might have been deposited upon some remote shore, where no rock of the same nature was to be found, and where it might have furnished future geologists with subject for most interesting speculations. These would have been naturally the more puzzling, that its peculiar mode of transportation would have totally precluded all chance of its acute angular projections being destroyed by attrition, and so would have prevented the possibility of its exhibiting those appearances of having been rounded and polished, so manifestly displayed by most of those stones denominated Boulders. How far the causes which are thus known to have operated in producing the removal of this vast fragment, may appear to tally with the relative situation of similar masses in other places which cannot be so easily traced to their parent rock, or to ascertain whether such means may not have had some share in transporting these to their new situations, may perhaps merit investigation; and with such a view, an accurate and well attested narration of the particulars of the conveyance of the Travelled Stone near CastleStuart, from its former to its present place of quiescence, cannot be considered as altogether useless in the pursuit of geology. Yours, &c.


