On Fossil Infusoria found in the County Down, Ireland. 

When my friend William Thompson, Esq., was at Newcastle (at the base of the Mourne Mountains, County Down) last autumn, he received a specimen of a very light, white, earthy substance, which had been found some time previously in considerable quantity, in that neighbourhood ; and a short time ago he requested me to investigate its nature, as he felt assured that it was the same kind of substance as Professor Bailey had found in a bog at West Point, in America, (as stated in Silliman's Journal for October, 1838), and which was composed of fossil infusorial remains. I undertook the investigation, and soon found that this anticipation was right; the whole mass consisting of the siliceous remains of organized microscopic beings, either animal or vegetable. I am not aware that fossil Infusoria have hitherto been detected in the British islands, but if not, their discovery is due to Mr. Thompson, as I have only followed up and ascertained, by microscopical investigation, that the views which he had previously entertained were correct. 

The substance alluded to is, when dry, of the whiteness of chalk, but becomes brownish when wet ; it is as light as carbonate of magnesia, which it much resembles, but is not acted on by nitric, muriatic, or sulphuric acids, and is indestructible by fire. The specimen I received was a compact mass, of the shape, and nearly the size, of an ordinary building-brick ; it could easily be rubbed down into powder, and had a coarse and somewhat fibrous fracture ; when a portion was rubbed between the finger and thumb, it had no grittiness, but felt like an impalpable powder, and when it was then blown into the air, it flew about almost like wood-ashes. 
I had learned from my friend and assistant in my anatomical demonstrations, Mr. Shaw, that during the past summer, his uncle, Dr. Hunter, of Bryansford (near Newcastle), and himself, had been making chemical experiments on a singular substance which had lately been found in that neighbourhood ; that they had proved it to be silex, but could ascertain nothing farther concerning it. On showing the specimen to Mr. Shaw, he at once knew it to be identical with the substance which they had been examining ; I accordingly requested him to write to Bryansford, and obtain all the particulars he could concerning it, and the following is Dr. Hunter's answer. 

"I should sooner have written, but I waited to procure accurate information respecting the deposit at Lough-Island Reavey. l It was found on lowering the water of the lake by the Bann Company, lying in considerable quantity under a covering of about a foot of boggy soil. It was in a semi-fluid state, of the consistence of thick mud, and could be lifted out with a shovel. It soon dried when laid out on the bank. There is also a stratum of an apparently similar substance found in a mountain valley to the south of Slieve Bernagh, in the midst of the Mourne range. It cuts out and shows itself on the face of a bank covered also with a stratum of peaty soil. There are also detached pieces of what I consider a similar matter occasionally found in the low parts of the alluvial soil of Corrogs, of these I shall endeavour to procure specimens, and if possible myself inspect the place where they are found, and send them to you as soon as possible." 

Magnified views of fossil infusorial remains. 

On examining many times small portions of the fossil mixed with a little water, on a slip of glass, the whole was found to be composed of the bodies represented in fig. 44, of which the long, linear spicula {a) form at least four-fifths. The next most abundant are those marked (b), then (c) ; those marked (d) are still less numerous, and not always seen, though in some of my examinations the portion of fossil in the microscope consisted of them chiefly. Occasionally confervoid fragments (e) were seen, and frequently minute annular portions, while {g) is very rare. These are all the bodies which I have observed ; there was no admixture whatever of unorganized matter, and no medium of cement whatever. 

The spicular bodies (a) are joints of the Diatoma elongatum. This species grows in the utmost abundance in a small drain of clear water, in the grounds of the Royal Belfast Institution, and its 
joints in the microscope are seen to be precisely similar to the spicular bodies. When the loricated Infusoria are burned to ashes, the latter are found to be their siliceous coverings unchanged; and the same thing occurs in the Diatoma, as was discovered by De Brebisson and Professor Bailey.  On burning the Diatoma elongatum to a red heat, I found it, when cold, to be unchanged in form and appearance, its sharpness of outline being equally well defined as before. The Navicula tripunctata I found equally unaffected by heat, as also some other Infusoria with which I am little acquainted. 
Of the other bodies in the fossil I as yet know nothing more than their appearance ; but I think an examination of the waters in the localities where the deposit is found, would bring them to light in a recent state. 

The deposit which I have now described is evidently of the same description as that found by Professor Bailey in the New World, and analogous to what is found in several places of the Old ; viz. the Kieselguhr of Franzenbad, and the deposit in peat-bog near the same place, the Bergmehl of Santa Fiora, &c, which are formed of fossil infusorial remains.  

