  The small collection of specimens connected with the following pages, form the chief part of a series, by which I intended to have exemplified the rocks that might occur in a journey from Calcutta to Bombay. But many circumstances, which it is unnecessary to detail, conspired with the insufficiency of the collector's science to render this plan in a considerable degree abortive.
  I had particularly to lament my ignorance of Geology, during the first part of the journey from Delhi to Bombay, when our route lay among primitive mountains, full of interest to the geologist. This, no doubt, frequently occasioned my omitting to take specimens where they would have been important, and may have rendered those taken far less valuable than they would have been if more judiciously selected: at the same time I may observe, that it was made a particular object to select only such parts of a rock as were unaffected by exposure; to take a specimen of every new rock that came under observation; and, where possible, to note the junction of different predominating substances; with such other particulars as my own observations, or the instructions I had received from others, induced me to consider worthy of attention. The collection would have been more complete, had I fortunately preserved all that I took; but from the inattention of servants, or from the loss of a whole parcel, it was too late discovered that many of the most valuable were missing, and the extent of the loss I cannot exactly state.
  I have purposely omitted adverting to the country through which our-route led from Calcutta to Delhi, and to the districts south-east of the Chumbul, fearing to mislead in any attempt to describe them from memory: but whatever my obsevations may amount to, will form the basis of another notice, to accompany the specimens from that part of India, when they shall be arranged and presented to the Geological Society.
The country in the vicinity of Delhi, both above and below it, upon the Jumna's banks, and in the Doab opposite, varies little, if at all, from other parts of the valley of Hindoostan; but the site of all former capitals of this sovereignty, as well as of the present city, is upon a low and rocky ridge of hills, which ends almost immediately beyond, upon the river bank: nor is there, as far as I am aware, any mass of rock, certainly none of any magnitude or importance, found at this point on the East bank of the Jumna.
This point appears to be the termination, as far as can be seen above the surface, of a range of primitive mountains, connected if not visibly continuous with all those that intersect, and in many parts entirely occupy, the country to the north and west of the Chumbul, and which probably may be found in different parts of the whole peninsula to the southward, as far even as Cape Commorin. Whether the connexion may not be also traced northward, to the Himalaya Mountains, is a point which does not come within the range of this confined notice.
The hills at Delhi are but a ridge, not exceeding one to two miles in breadth, nor any where more than a hundred to a hundred-and-thirty feet high. Taking thence a southern direction, they spread out in breadth; and increasing in the number of ridges, pass into what is commonly called the Mewat Country; no where exceeding a thousand feet in height, and generally ranging from three to seven hundred. The height of the hills increases to the southward; and the fort of Alwur is situated upon the highest point, which may possibly reach 1200 feet. Towards the west and north-west from the vicinity of Delhi, small ridges and insulated peaks run out as far as the southern part of Hurrianuh; the Hill of Tooham, about sixteen miles to the south of Hansee, being the most northern: it is a single and almost bare rock of red granite, extremely hard, and about seven hundred feet high. There are no hills north of this, to the foot of the Himalaya range, nor westward, to the Indus.
From Mewat the hills take a wider spread; the eastern boundary running nearly in a southern direction, and leaving between it and the Jumna, all the way to the Chumbul, a space of level country which varies in breadth, but is seldom less than forty miles wide. Hills do indeed occur within this space, chiefly of sandstone; but they are evidently of u class and character quite different from, and unconnected with, those in question. On the south-west of Delhi the latter take u south-eastern course, from Hurrianuh to Ajmere; whence they run down more to the southward, but still with an eastern tendency, separating the elevated plateau of Mewar, and the countries to the east, from Marwaur, Jesselmere, and the lower and more sandy countries of the west; till, at some point not fully ascertained, they are lost in the extensive and elevated trap formations of Malwa, and the countries to the east and southward of that province.
The interior of this wide outline of hills is filled up with a succession of ranges, and valleys, and of plains diversified by insulated peaks or clusters of rocky hills, varying in height and sometimes in character: the ranges of this tract of mountains being seldom continuous with one another above the surface, though every thing declares that they are all connected below. Large tracts it is true occur, which are wholly of a mountainous character; such as great part of Mewar, parts of Jeypoor (or Dhoomdar), and probably several countries to the south-east; but it is only on the western boundary, that the chain assumes its truly mountainous aspect. It will be seen in the sequel, that between Marwaur and Mewar, peaks and mountains occur above two thousand feet high; and to the southward this height may probably be exceeded.
  It is remarkable that towards the north, and on the eastern boundary, the hills, though varying little in composition, present a more equal, level-topped appearance, resembling the table-like forms of the trap-formation; no peaks rising above a certain very distinctly defined height: while to the southward, and indeed all along the western boundary, they assume the bold, peaked, and jagged forms of primitive mountains.
The rocks at Delhi are almost entirely composed of quartz: the variety which chiefly predominates having always a tendency to semitransparency and a vitreous fracture, and varying in colour from grey to yellow and red or brown; and this stone appears, by some addition to its component parts or some variation in their admixture, to graduate into sandstone, which is found indiscriminately with it in most parts of the hills: the substance which colours it, also occurring in spots throughout. These rocks are disposed in strata dipping generally towards the S.W. from the horizon, at an angle of about 45°. They have moreover a tendency to division across the strata, as also vertically, so as to produre a cubiform shape. Mica is found occasionally, both in pieces of considerable size and scattered about among the soil; but not, I think, in intimate commixture with the rock itself. The quartzose rock first mentioned is sometimes found of a more granular character; but I could not detect its exact junction with, or transition into, the opake sandy rock.
The old building's about Delhi, where strength lias been the principal object, are almost uniformly formed of this quartzy sandstone; and all the old Hindoo pillars, which seem to have been obtained from the destruction of some temple near the place, and now form part of the Mahomedan buildings around the celebrated tower called the Cootub Minar, are of the same stone: some of these are now passing to decay; assuming often, in such cases, the appearance of coarse grey sugar.
Leaving the chief range of these hills at the Cootub Minar, eleven miles to the south-westward of Delhi, we crossed several lower and less important hills, the tops of which were flat, or rounded, and covered with masses of stone of the same quartzy nature as that above described, the edges and corners being worn off by gradual decomposition, till they had acquired a globular or at least rounded character: scales, as it were, falling off by effect of exposure to the weather. These stones, as well as those at Delhi, are all more or less tinged with iron ore. The hills are very scantily covered with grass and vegetation, and, except in the rains, have a black, gloomy, and barren appearance.
Ten miles on, to the south-west, we entered on a plain alternately sandy and clayey, which, lying between two ranges of hills, extends to Feerozepoor, and indeed a great deal further in the same direction, about S.S.W. Neither range differs much in character or composition from that we had just left, but they rise gradually in height: that to the left-hand takes a direction to the southward of our route; and that on the right increases in width and runs between Rewarrie and Mewat, the valley, properly speaking, in which Feerozepoor is situated and through which our route led.
The hills immediately about this place are probably from four to six hundred feet in height; their tops run much upon a level, without any peak aspiring above the rest, and they are only varied by the water-courses which have furrowed their sides. The predominating rock is granular quartz, nearly the same as that at Delhi; and this forms apparently the whole of the tops of the hills. In penetrating towards their interior, in one of the water-courses (which leads in fact quite through the western range), a more slaty form of quartz was found, occurring in great abundance in a low situation, and apparently occupying the lower and interior part of the range. It is a sort of plum-pudding stone, the cement of which is iron ore, or clay strongly tinged with iron; and it varies considerably in appearance and composition in different situations. The inclosed fragments consist of various substances, generally so large that it was impossible to carry away a good specimen; but I believe they consisted chiefly of the same substances as the surrounding rocks, with a cement of ferruginous clay. This rock is much pervaded with caves and fissures, seemingly of great extent: it is more destructible than the quartz rock, more readily forms soil, and is consequently more overgrown with trees and herbage of all sorts; and it seems also retentive of water to nourish them, for they are greener than in other situations.
The stratification of these rocks resembles that of those we have considered at Delhi; they seem to dip at about an angle of 75° towards the southwest.
  On the top and surface of the hills, which are little covered with herbage of any sort, we find a rock which in substance seems to consist of the same quartz, but changed by exposure, and varying in colour; and in some instances worn into cellular cavities.
There is in all these hills a great deal of brown iron ore, which yields a considerable portion of metal, but might produce much more in the hands of skilful smelters; for a great quantity is lost in what is considered only as dross, but which in reality is so rich a slag, that workmen from Marwaur find it worth while to come and carry it away, for the purpose of melting over again.
Continuing our course, we proceeded about twenty-six miles south-west, to Alwur, still considered in the country of Mewat. During this march the hills increased somewhat in magnitude, height, and picturesque appearance, but did not vary in substance or structure. Strata rising beyond the surface, were very conspicuous on various exposures, but it was not easy to detect the dip or general direction: they seemed to be pervaded by numerous veins of fine white quartz. In the plains between the connected ranges, many sharp and insulated peaks, and clusters of peaks (called emphatically by the natives, from their form, Dauts or teeth) were observed starting abruptly from the surface, but no doubt connected beneath it with the more continuous ranges that surround them.
  At Alwur the hills rise to a greater height, and in many places assume a grander and more primitive character, than those we had left: one singular conical peak, partly detached from the great hill on which the fort is situated, affords a good specimen of the structure of the range at this point. The strata, nearly vertical, but dipping from the horizon towards the east at an angle of 70° to 80°, run in a course little deviating from north and south; they protrude far beyond the surface of the hill from top to bottom: in fact, there is little soil, and the surface consists chiefly of debris from the destruction of the rocks. These strata and all the hills around are pervaded by veins of fine white quartz, running' from north to south, and dipping at an angle of about 10°. The prevailing rock is still quartz: but we find in it the same various admixtures of sand, so as to make it approach to sandstone in appearance; the diaphanous sort however predominates, varying in colour from reddish-white to blueish-grey. The veins of quartz are sometimes very numerous; they are irregularly distributed, and vary in thickness from a quarter of an inch to a foot.
The fort of Alwur is situated on the loftiest of these hills, and may be 1200 feet in height from the plain; the highest of the rest do not rise above 1000 feet, but in general they are lower. One of the remarkable characteristics of this portion of the range, its regularity of height, is conspicuous on looking down upon it from the superior height of Alwur fort, from whence all the hills appear to rise nearly to a level, stretching out with this uniform appearance far to the west and north-west, and in fact quite bounding the view in these quarters.
The same range also runs nearly south about twenty miles further, to Rajguhr, which is situated in a basin among the hills on the eastern boundary. The composition and structure do not materially vary; but we found mica-slate in some places, and I was informed that a fine-grained black slate, used in sculpture to adorn their buildings, was found in the vicinity.
From Rajguhr to Amber near Jaypoor, a distance of about seventy miles, in a west-south-west direction, the country varies little from that already described; consisting of sandy plains and valleys deeply indented with watercourses, and uneven in their surface, with a few spots of rich clay or mould, where cultivation is scantily carried on; insulated peaks and clusters of dentated hills, here and there rising from the general level. The rock generally approaches near to the surface, and often appears above it in a state of decomposition, falling into coarse sand, consisting of quartz, mica, and felspar. In passing through a ghat, about thirty miles from Amber, we saw a single small hill, composed entirely of a white stone, which we were told was marble; and limestone in plenty certainly is found in the vicinity. The other hills differed in no respect from those already described, the strata pointing to the northeast and east, and the rocky faces being chiefly to the south-east and east.
The hills at Amber and Jaypoor do not vary from those already mentioned, but are not so lofty as those about Alwur. The predominating rocks were still quartz and granite; and the stone commonly used in building is granular limestone of a light greyish hue, taken from the vicinity of the town: there is none however, we were informed, very near it, of a texture sufficiently fine to be used as marble:—that in most common use, which is taken from twenty to thirty miles to the westward, is grey, veined with a darker shade. All the white marble is brought from Mukrana, a place about thirty or forty miles north or north-west from Ajmere, which is remarkable all over this part of India for its fine marble: the grain however would be considered as very coarse in Europe, and for statuary it would not at all answer.
Leaving Jaypoor and proceeding in a west-south-west direction, towards Ajmere, the hills, at the foot of which the former is situated, bend to the northwest; and the road passes for the first thirty miles through a sandy and uneven country, with water at no great depth from the surface. A few insulated hills appear on the right; and a range to the left is barely in view in the distance. For the remainder of the way to Kishenguhr, a distance of forty miles at the least, the country becomes clayey, with occasional gravel; the rocks, however, in some places rise to the surface, thus proving the continuity of the same substances beneath. They consist of gneiss and granite, the latter approaching to the graphic character, and apparently disposed in strata, which dip at a small angle to the horizon. Both rocks, at the surface, are in a state of decomposition, and gravel and sand of the same nature are abundant all around.
Kishenguhr is situated at the foot of a range of hills, which stretch towards the north, and probably join those of Jaypoor, which have been mentioned as deflecting to the north-west. There cannot be much doubt of their connexion beneath the surface, as their components and structure are perfectly similar: but they differ considerably in appearance, from the Jaypoor hills, assuming far more commanding and picturesque forms, and rising into lofty peaks or separating into bold masses; and this character they retain both at Ajmere and in the ranges that run to the southward. The valley through which the road to Ajmere lies, is of uneven surface, and various in its soil; and small dentated hills here and there rear themselves above its general level.
About Ajmere, the hills are much more lofty and magnificent than any our march had yet led through and there is a wildness and disorder in their form and outline which are particularly striking. The fort of Farraguhr is built on a hill, which cannot, I think, be less than 1200 feet high: it is probably the loftiest in this part of the range. Granite, gneiss, and quartz rock were observed to prevail chiefly in this part of the country; the last differing little, if at all, from that found in the vicinity of Delhi, and like it constituting the tops of all the mountains, and assuming the same stratiform appearance. Gneiss is also found between Jaypoor and Kishenguhr, in some instances passing into fine-grained mica-slate; of which latter rock there were many varieties in colour and substance, in strata pointing generally north and south, and dipping at various angles.
  In one hill, which fell more particularly under examination, this laminated mica-slate occupied about one-third of the height at the lower part on the north-east side, the strata pointing chiefly to the north, and dipping at an angle of about 20°; and above it, quartz rock occupied the remaining twothirds, pointing towards the north-east and east, and constituting the whole of the south-west side of the hill, where no more slate appeared. It seemed, therefore, that the quartz overlaid the mica-slate from the south-westward; and the same thing was remarked in several of these western ranges.
The mica-slate and quartz rock are both plentifully veined with quartz, sometimes occurring between the laminae, but more generally in vertical veins, running north and south. The granite in some parts of this tract is of uncommonly large grain.
There are lead mines of considerable richness in the hill of Farraguhr, worked by the Government; but the want of demand prevents them from being profitable.
  It would be wrong to quit this part of the country without mentioning the Sambur salt-lake, from which annually a quantity of salt is sent, that supplies nearly the whole of Upper India. Every year, after the rains, the water becomes impregnated with so great a quantity of salt, that when the lake dries up, the salt is found crystallized in great quantity under the layer of mud, which is also deposited. Circumstances prevented me from going to visit this place, which however is not singular, for there are many lakes of less note in that part of India which yield salt of various qualities, particularly one to the westward of Jhodepoor. The soil, indeed, is in many places much impregnated with salt; and it is very rare in these parts ever to see a hollow or low place without a salt efflorescence appearing on the surface.
Our route from hence lay north-west, towards Nagore; and after a distance of twelve or fourteen miles we quitted the hills, which we observed running towards the north-east in a very distinctly marked line. From this point to Nagore our route lay entirely through a plain, diversified only by sand-hills of no importance, with clayey bottoms between them, and occasionally high and barren banks of hard clay mixed with kunker,—a sort of calcareous concretion, found almost all over India in such situations. The first part of this route was over a heavy yellow sand; and here water is found at moderate depths. The low clayey bottoms are fertile; being naturally moist, and generally covered with a saline efflorescence. In the higher clayey tracts, on the contrary, water is found only at very great depths, and the soil is useless, because out of the reach of irrigation: towards Nagore water is obtained at a depth of from eighty to a hundred feet. Approaching that place, the sand becomes more grey and coarse, being mingled with kunker and gravel; and throughout the whole way only one or two insulated peaks of rock are seen, which are all within thirty miles of Ajmere. Within about twelve miles of Nagore, a small hill occurs about sixty feet high, which is formed of quartz nearly of the same nature as the predominating rock of the hills we had left.
There is good reason for believing that a large portion of the country around Nagore rests on a bed of coarse red sandstone; which is found at various depths near that town, and colours part of the soil, and all the water in the tanks. All the buildings of that city are formed of this stone, from quarries dug within the walls and in the vicinity. Water is here in some places found at a small depth, and remains throughout the year in tanks dug for the purpose, not artificially made water-tight.
Nagore is built on a kunker bank, which produces nothing for more than a mile round a great part of the city. The view to the westward is as dreary as can be conceived; a succession of barren sand-hills spotted with brown and blasted-looking bushes; and towards this quarter water is more scarce, not occurring within the depth of from one hundred and fifty to two hundred feet from the surface.
The under stratum of red sandstone continues from Nagore to the southward; and as we journeyed from that place to Jhodepoor, it tinged the soil in most places, except where the hard kunker bed occurred: it is a heavy, dull, coarse red stone, inclosing a good many crystals of quartz. About forty miles from Jhodepoor, and fifty from Nagore, this sandstone rises to the surface, and various small hills are observed on either hand, which soon unite in ranges of no great height and not very continuous. These hills also are composed of the red sandstone varying from fine- to coarse-grained, and are evidently nothing but the strata of the great bed, which rise occasionally above the general level of the country, but are quite horizontal in position. The hills never exceed from three to four hundred feet in height, and are seldom so high; their tops seem perfectly table-form, and if any where a rock or peak rises above the general level, it is merely an additional stratum parallel to the rest.
The country from this point becomes undulated irregularly, the rock frequently approaching the surface; and the soil, when not a deposition of clay in the hollows, consisting generally of sand, the detritus of the hills. The scanty soil of the hills is likewise generally sand: there is also much calcareous kunker over the country; and occasional rich loamy valleys, in some of which water is found within a few feet of the surface.
  An irregularly undulated tract of country, of fifteen or twenty miles in breadth, occurs between the hills just mentioned and those on which Jhodepoor is situated; and the appearance of the two ranges differs considerably. The latter hills are more rough and bare of soil, and consist of two sorts of rock; the one a freestone, sometimes resembling the red sandstone, but varying from its dull-red colour to a yellowish-grey, and from a very coarse granular to a fine-grained compact texture. This stone is easily split into slabs of any required thickness and dimensions, and thus answers many of the purposes of wood in a country where there is hardly any to be had.—The other kind of rock is clay-stone porphyry; either liver-coloured, with pale reddish spots, or of a grey colour; both varieties containing numerous small cavities like air-holes. The fracture of this rock is irregular: when fresh it is hard; but it softens, cracks, and falls into dust upon exposure to the air; and the edges and angles of the blocks falling off, leave only roundish lumps.
  It was not very easy to determine the relative positions of these two kinds of rock; but, from all the circumstances, I felt disposed to conclude that the porphyry overlies the sandstone; and I never saw sandstone above it. In some of the hills however there was no sandstone, the rocks consisting entirely of this porphyry, the liver-coloured sort being uppermost; and in others nothing but sandstone could be traced. The loftiest of these hills do not appear to exceed 360 or 370 feet in height, and 200 may be more near their general elevation. They stretch a good way towards the west, but I cannot say how far. They are also seen for several miles to the northward and southward; and numerous insulated peaks and considerable masses appear fading into distance in the latter direction.
For the next thirty or thirty-five miles from Jhodepoor towards Mewar, in the direction of south-south-east, the country resembles that already described; presenting a succession of sand-hills with clay in the intervals. A few small rocky hills which rise above the surface, consist in some instances of the claystone porphyry, in others of the sandy stone of Jhodepoor. To the southward distant hills were seen, of greater height than those of Jhodepoor; and on the left, or north-eastward, several peaks appeared, in one of which, called Poonookur, we were informed, there are mines of lead.
About Pahlee, a town forty miles from Jhodepoor, in a south-eastern direction, we passed several small ranges and dentated peaks of a very loose reddish sandstone, inclosing in its substance large masses and grains of quartz and gravel of other sorts: the soil about them is a loose sand and gravel. Hitherto, and for some few miles further on, water is scarce, and only to be found at great depths, or in the beds of streams, which are at this season dry, though covered with a saline efflorescence. Beyond Pahlee, for the space of about forty miles, to the foot of the range already mentioned as continuous from Ajmere, and by which Marwaur is separated from Mewar, water is plenty, irrigation practicable, and the country in consequence comparatively rich and smiling. We could not discover the point where the sandstone of Marwaur ends, and the primitive rocks commence; but from the greater predominance of quartz in the hills at Pahlee, it was suspected that the change occurs in that vicinity. This chain of mountains which we now ascended, though a very important feature in the country, does not claim any particular description: they consist exactly of the same sorts of rock, and in appearance a good deal resemble those of the same range at Ajmere. This face of the range however is more wooded, and attains a far greater height than near Ajmere; for the table-land or plateau (if so irregular and mountainous a country may be so termed) of Marwaur rises towards the south; and it is probable that the height of this part of the range is at least from 750 to 1000 feet above Mewar, and that of the mountainous peaks at least from 2000 to 2500 feet above the level of the plains of Marwaur.
  It is, I presume, generally known, that the country in the central part of India, to the north of the Nurbuddah, and between the chain of mountains at present under consideration, and the valley of the Jumna and Ganges, rises —gradually from the northward towards the south, abruptly from the westward, and irregularly—that is to say, in some parts gradually, in others abruptly— from the east, so as to form a great table-land or plateau, of which the southern part (the province of Marwaur) is elevated from 1400 to 1700 feet above the valley of the Nurbuddah, and 2000 feet above the sea. It is only the western portion of this great table-land that at present claims attention. The base of this tract, to the northward, evidently consists of primitive rocks, the peaks of which appear through the general surface, forming the ranges and insulated mountains that have been described. To the southward it is composed of a bed of basalt, which forms part of the very extensive trap formation that occupies the western side of the Indian peninsula to a point nearly as far south as Goa; but the extent of which to the eastward I have not been informed off.
  At the point we had now reached in Mewar, the country had attained a height perhaps of from 700 to 800 feet above Marwaur; and on our ascent up the Deoghur pass we found ourselves in a hilly tract, which extended all around to the north, south, and south-east: but to the north-east the country was more open, and probably lower. Our route to Odeepoor however lay entirely amongst ranges of very rugged though not lofty hills, between which the country is undulated in a very irregular manner; the rock every where coming to the surface, and rising in shapeless masses above it. Many varieties of gneiss were found here, plentifully veined with quartz, and united in the same mass with quartz abounding in mica. The strata were nearly vertical, running north and south; the laminae were sometimes waved exceedingly; and in some instances, the softer parts having been washed away by the action of the weather, the harder portions thus waved projected, and had a very singular appearance.
The predominating rock of the hills about the Deoghur pass is quartz, which abounds every where in this part of the country; whole peaks of it appearing, pure, white and glittering like snow, and mingled with masses of a flesh colour. Limestone also occasionally occurs: and at Kankerowly, about thirty or thirty-five miles from Odeepoor, there is a lake, partly artificial and partly natural, the magnificent dams of which are entirely built of a species of marble, found close in the vicinity, at a place called Rajnugur.
About Odeepoor itself, the summits of the hills are composed of granite and quartz rock: and about their foot schistus of various sorts is found. A compound of quartz and mica is among these strata; the course of which is invariably from north to south, the angle of deviation from the vertical plane not exceeding five or ten degrees to the west or east; and in every instance they are plentifully pervaded by veins of quartz, in the same direction with the strata.
Rocks were likewise met with here as at Ajmerc, that seemed to defy classification; masses of quartz, schist, and granite, huddled together in pieces of all sizes, as if the whole had hecn overthrown and heaped into one mass of confusion. Above all this, reddish felspar and quartz rock are always found in strata, dipping at various angles from thirty-five to eighty degrees to the horizon.
Besides these predominating rocks, it is probable that green jasper and porphyry occur in the vicinity of Odeepoor, as articles and ornaments of these substances are seen in the city. A fine black stone resembling marble is also much in use, which is susceptible of a considerable degree of polish, and is cut into beautiful sculptures and ornaments: it is probably only a variety of the dark slate of the country. Marble, both white and grey, is also much employed, but it all comes from Rajnughur, near Kankerowlee.
From Odeepoor our route lay towards Neemuck. The distance from the former place to the eastern boundary of the hills among which it is situated, is about thirteen miles; and from hence a comparatively plain and open country commences, with but one or two hills rising above its level, and these were near the range we had passed. The rock was of precisely the same red granite that we saw at Odeepoor; and the connexion seems to be preserved as far as a range of low hills about fifty to sixty miles east of that place, which consist chiefly of quartz and granite; but after that point we saw no more of the primitive rocks.
Just below the range last mentioned, is found a compact limestone of a greenish-grey colour and splintery fracture, effervescing strongly with acids: and this rock seems to form the basis of a considerable tract of country. The strata, which are very distinct, are horizontal, or dip to the north-east or southwest at an angle not greater than from ten to fifteen degrees. The soil that lies on this rock is a loose black mould, which in dry weather gapes and cracks in all directions to a considerable depth.
  In the vicinity were low hills, of a very different character from those we had left; their tops were level and compressed; and they looked more like mounds of artificial construction than natural hills. These were in fact the commencement of the trap formation of Malwa and the Deccan. They appeared to consist of yellow or reddish earth, of an ochry nature, with gravel and rounded stones. In (he plain, both among this gravel and the black mould, numbers of ogate-likc pebbles were found of a semi-transparent horny or milky colour; and a few miles onwards, within four or five miles of Neemuck cantonment, the low round hills were covered with rounded stones in great profusion, and of all sizes, consisting of the black basalt, that forms the basis of the whole country to the Nurbuddah, and far beyond it to the southward.
From this point to Jam-ghat, on the extremity of the table-land of Malwa, and on the descent to the Nurbuddah, the geological nature of the country suffers little or no alteration in appearance or in reality. Extensive gentle undulations, of no considerable height, are divided from each other by small water-courses, which for most part of the year retain a certain quantity of running water. These heights are sometimes covered with the deep black mould universal in Malwa and several of the elevated countries that occupy this plateau: sometimes we find a hard dark and stony soil, denoting that at no great depth below the rock the same black basalt is to be found. Around Neemuck, and for some distance to the south and eastward, red ironstone is found, occupying some of the low rounded hills that occasionally occur, as'well as the extensive undulating downs which form the country. Compact limestone, containing sparry iron ore, is used in building; and the greenish-grey limestone, already mentioned, is found in several places in the vicinity, and is used in various ways.
The same description applies to the country south from Neemuck to Pertaubgurh, and from thence to Deola, a fort on the brow of the hills overlooking the jungle that stretches towards Goojerat. The hills are far from lofty, and the fall to the westward is either uniform, or broken into various descents by a gradation of hills.
  We then proceeded eastward, by Mundussor, to the banks of the Chumbul at Aorah-ghat, through a country precisely similar; small hills of black basalt, with their level stratiform tops, occasionally rising out of the ground. The river runs in a bed of black basalt, about sixty feet deep from the surrounding country. The surface of this rock, when exposed, appears to be split into hexagonal pieces approaching the columnar form; but no columns are to be found. The whole rock is much tinged with iron. Agate-like pebbles, and other forms of quartz, are scattered thickly all about; and we now began to find geodes of quartz, which afterwards occurred in great abundance.
The banks of all the considerable streams in this part of the country were composed of a very fine light-coloured grey clay, in great depth, which rested upon the basalt, instead of the black mould or red gravel constituting the soil of the country already described.
About four miles to the eastward of Aorah-ghat there is a range of hills, not many miles in extent, and not more than from 150 to 200 feet high, principally composed of a cellular clayey brown iron ore; which varies much in hardness, inclosing masses both of soft unchanged clay, and hard nodules and veins of a highly metallic character. To the southward of this place, the strong tinge indicating the presence of much iron is no longer observed; and the country is exactly like what has already been described, the whole way to the cantonment of Mow, only sixteen miles from Jam-ghat. There are in this tract several basins, as it were, of a fine grey clay: and in one of the most extensive of these is situated the city of Oogen, of which the fable is told, that it was overwhelmed by a shower of cold earth. But there is not in the place itself, or in the vicinity, any reason to suspect the former occurrence of any convulsion of nature from which the fable may be supposed to have originated; every thing, on the contrary, indicating that the old city has merely experienced that gradual decay which has swept from the face of the land so many Indian cities of celebrity and grandeur, the vestiges of which are now seen only in heaps of rubbish similar to those found in old Oogen.
  It has been already stated that the table-land of Malwa sinks abruptly to the bed of the Nurbuddah,—or rather to the valley of Nemaur, in which that river runs. This range of ghats forms the southern boundary, if'not the whole mass of what arc known by the name of the Vindhya mountains. Their peaks rise but little above the level of Malwa; but there is a chain or succession of such peaks along that part of the mountains which came under our view in the course of our journey; and the abrupt face of this mountainous barrier exhibits perhaps as perfect and interesting a specimen of the formation of the country as can any where be seen. The upper part, for several hundred feet, is almost perpendicular; and even below this, though the slope is more considerable, yet the angle of elevation is very great. On the face of the hill thus exposed, to the depth of full 1500 feet, are seen numerous strata, strictly parallel, and running in a horizontal direction, which appear to consist alternately of rock and soil, or at least of harder and softer rock, and on inspection prove to be the common black basalt and amygdaloid. There are fifteen or sixteen such strata distinctly to be reckoned. This amygdaloid is plentifully studded with zeolite, in masses of various shapes, and generally coated with green earth, which is sometimes of considerable thickness, at others merely superficial. The amygdaloid itself is of various degrees of hardness; from that of stone fit for building, to a soft, decomposing, almost earthy mass. It appears as if the rock cracked by exposure to the air, that the corners then commenced mouldering off, and were succeeded by flakes, scaling off like those of an onion, and leaving the centre as if a kernel. The more solid rock is universally the dark-coloured basalt, which sometimes assumes the hexagonal appearance remarked in the bed of the Chumbul and of several other rivers; and now and then approaches nearly to the columnar form. Throughout this range of hills,, and generally among the whole of the trap formation in these parts, fragments of quartz and zeolite of various shapes are found scattered in great abundance. Quartz is found also in veins in the basalt, as well as in geodes, in which calcareous spar very often fills up the interstices of the quartz crystals.
The basalt in these countries rarely assumes the columnar form; but at Mundlisoor, on the banks of the Nurbuddah, a small hill exhibits on its crest a series of basaltic pillars, chiefly hexagonal: they are about a foot in diameter, and from two to four feet high; and a fine tessellated pavement is formed by their tops, which are on a level with part of the ground. A dyke of very compact stone, like Lydian stone, crosses the basalt on the river bank, near the same place, projecting from its surface in a remarkable manner.
The valley of Nemaur, on both sides of the Nurbuddah, exhibits the same geological phaenomena as Malwa: we however passed along the top of the Vindhya range, reascending the ghats, and observing formations perfectly similar to those at Jam, at Mundoo (the ruins of an old town on the verge of the descent), at Dhar, and some other places in the neighbourhood, as well as at Oogen. Reddish limestone,, of a beautiful and remarkable character, is here used in ornamental buildings; I could not learn whence it came, but from the quantity made use of, it cannot be far from Mundoo. There was likewise in use a species of black marble, which probably is also found in the neighbourhood.
Passing on to the westward, we descended the mountains at Tanda-ghat, between Bhopawar and Baug. The ghat itself consists of the same rocks as the other parts of the hills,—basalt and amygdaloid, with zeolite and quartz in various shapes; but at the foot of the hill, and among the lower rocky rising grounds, we found a rock consisting of quartz and felspar, apparently belonging to the granitic formation: it occurred in a hollow, and was lost in the rising of the next hill, not extending to any considerable distance. A little further on clay-slate resembling greywacke slate was found, in vertical strata (as in the Ferimar hills), running about north-west and south-east; and gneiss occurred several times in large masses: quartz was more abundant; and we passed some remarkable rocks in beds, consisting of gravel, concreted by a cement witli the nature of which I was not acquainted.
  A little further on we came among sandstone hills, brdwn, red and grey, in horizontal strata. The fort and town of Bang are built on a hill of this description; and our route continued among sandstone of the same nature for six or eight miles, the heights differing little in appearance from the low trap hills of the other parts of the country. The strata were horizontal; and the whole being covered with thin short jungle, the change would not be readily remarked, were not the rock of the whole country, which rises to the surface in our very path, composed of the same sandstone. It was difficult to preserve specimens of this rock, as they soon mouldered away: it is generally very crumbling, and of various colours, from dark brown and heavy red, to yellow and dead white: and in some portions there is a great admixture of clay. The colours were in strata, and all horizontal. In several of the hills composed of this stone, we remarked that the sandstone was overlaid by strata of compact yellowishgrey limestone in beds varying in thickness, but apparently from ten to twelve feet thick, above which there was a thin coat of soil. This limestone evidently much resembles that first remarked on entering the trap formation near Neemuck.
Descending further towards the Nurbuddah, into the valley of Nemaur (or rather, I believe, the district of Ally Mohun), we again found the black basalt, which in the bed of one stream approached the columnar form. The whole bed of the Nurbuddah is here worn in a basaltic rock; and at the period we crossed it, having little water, it was sunk from sixty to one hundred feet below the level of the surrounding country. Above the basalt, close to, and for a few miles distant on each side the banks, the light-coloured fine clay, before alluded to, is found to considerable depth.
Some few miles below the point at which we crossed the Nurbuddah, the Sautpoora range of mountains, which intervene between Nemaur and Candeish, approach close to the river's bank, and are met by the Vindhya range on the other side, so that the river forces its way through a succession of rapids, which obstruct the navigation for several miles. The Sautpoora differ extremely in appearance from the Vindhya mountains, being bold and romantic in the outlines, rising into lofty peaks, and swelling into shapes that would induce the beholder from a distance to consider them as primitive: he is, however, soon undeceived, for on approach the same structure in horizontal strata becomes apparent; and notwithstanding the diversity of their outline, dnd more picturesque appearance, the description given of the Vindhya range, and the catalogue of the substances there found, will also apply to the Sautpoorah mountains. The highest peak of the latter is about 2500 feet above the sea, and consists of amygdaloid, green stone,—which seems to form more than one-half of the entire hill,—and at the top of basalt.
From this place to our entrance into Candeish, by the Sindwah-ghat, there seems nothing to remark: the route lay through a poor jungle, clothing scantily a succession of low barren hills, the dark rock every where starting through the surface.
Candeish is a singularly situated country; a low district surrounded on every side by higher lands; so that from every direction there is a descent into it: but this descent has probably been overrated, as the great though gradual ascent from other quarters to the passes which lead into Candeish, has not been taken into due consideration.
The soil of Candeish differs from that of Nemaur and Malwa; a fine rich chocolate-coloured mould taking the place of the black, deep, gaping soil of those places: there is here., it is true, much sand, and much hard unkindly soil of gravel and kunker; but many of the chief districts might be again rendered, as they once were, extremely fruitful.
The heights, known as the Inyadree hills, which separate Candeish from the district called the Gungleteree, present a very extraordinary aspect, and afford a singular specimen of the fantastic shapes which rocks of the trap formation assume. They rise to a certain height in a continuous range, marked at intervals by the strata of which they are composed; a distinct horizontal line runs along the whole; and the various masses that form the individual hills rising above this line, as from a base, at some distance from each other, attain the height of a few hundred feet more, traversed by other horizontal lines at still more elevated points. Some of the heights terminate, after one or more such stages, in a level table-land; others rise still higher, but on a reduced scale, so as to leave unoccupied a part of the subjacent table: and this succession is several times repeated, till the mountain ends in an insulated columnar mass. The outline, Plate XXIV. fig. 2. will perhaps give a clearer idea of this structure than any description.
Our route lay through the ghats near Candeish, Chandoor, and the district of Gungleteree, to Nassuck, and thence down the ghats, and through the northern Con can to Bombay. It exhibited only a repetition of the same mineral and geological phenomena of which a description has been attempted: but the rapidity with which we passed did not allow of any minute or laborious investigation.
The singular forms of the hills which bound the table-lands of India at this point, and are known by the name of The Ghats, have been the theme of every traveller: but though ever varying, they may generally be referred to the same principles of structure that have been mentioned in treating of the Inyadree hills; the heights being all most distinctly stratified horizontally, with successive ranges or portions of strata arising, in a diminishing series., to form their summits.
  Remarks on the preceding Paper, by the Secretaries. 
THE distance from Delhi to Bombay, in a direct line, is about 700 English miles; but Mr. Fraser's route, including his deviations from the immediate line of communication, very considerably exceeds that distance. For the reasons mentioned in the beginning of the paper, a small number only of the specimens which the author collected has reached the Society: but these are nevertheless sufficient, in combination with his narrative, to point out some interesting features of geological resemblance between the districts described and other parts of the world.
The specimens which Mr. Fraser's collection includes belong,—1. to the primary formations ;—2. to the secondary rocks;—3. to rocks of the trap formation ;—all of them according in composition and character with rocks of the same classes from other countries.
  1.—The extent of the primary tract in the central part of India, seems to be very considerable. It appears from the present memoir to occupy the greater part of the country between Delhi and Neymuck; and to occur again in the neighbourhood of Baug, and near the banks of the Nurbuddah, where gneiss and granite are visible under beds of sandstone, limestone, and trap. Primary rocks are found also, much further to the south, on the coast near Goa; not far from whence, to judge from other specimens in the collection of the Geological Society, they join the trap formation.
The place of the quartz-rock is pointed out by the author as being superior to the granite, gneiss, and mica slate; and it appears that the hills composed of that substance agree with those of similar composition in Europe, in presenting detached peaks and conical summits; a fact exemplified remarkably in the island of Skye and in the Paps of Jura, among the western islands of Scotland, and in the sugar-loaf mountains of the county of Wicklow in Ireland.
  2.—Among the substances of more recent formation than the primary rocks, are greywacke slate, sandstone, and limestone.
The appearances of the tract around Jhodepoor, on the west of the primary mountains, as described by Mr. Fraser, bear a very distinct resemblance to those of the new red sandstone, or red marl formation of England; and the specimens of reddish part of India precisely resemble those of the red marl of Somersetshire, Devonpfire, and other counties in which that formation exists. The occurrence of claystone porphyry in connexion with this sandstone, is a further point of resemblance; the specimen of the former substance from the Jhodepoor hills, agreeing exactly with the porphyritic masses which are found in the red marl of Somerset and Devon. The nature of the connexion between these rocks in India is, however, deserving of further inquiry; and in England it is still involved in some obscurity.
The description and specimens of the sandstone which occurs at Baugana in its vicinity, at a considerable distance from the districts above mentioned, agree with those of the sandstone from the neighbourhood of Jhodepoor, and of the English red marl.
From the statement of Major Rennell, that the tract between the Indus and the Chelum is wonderfully productive of salt mines, affording masses of salt hard enough to be formed into vessels, Dr. Kidd has been led to suppose that the red marl formation probably abounds about the stream of the Indus. The facts mentioned by Mr. Fraser add strength to this conjecture; and it is highly probable that the vast sandy deserts on the west of India, throughout which salt lakes occur, belong to the same formation;—which is known to occupy extensive tracts (and in many instances to assume the character of sandy deserts) in Russia \ and various parts of the continent of Europe, Africa J, and North America.
The relations of the secondary limestones, mentioned by Mr. Fraser, are well deserving the investigation of future inquirers. In the vicinity of Baug, the order of the rocks appears to be, granite, clay slate (or grey wacke slate) in strata nearly vertical; red sandstone in horizontal strata; and above these compact yellowish-grey limestone, resembling that which is described as occupying a considerable tract of country in the vicinity of Neemuck, about 140 miles to the north of Baug.
  3.—The position and appearances of the trap rocks described by Mr. Fraser, are no less in accordance with those of similar composition in other countries. The specimens are almost identical with the basalts, and amygdaloids of Europe;—and the sketch of the heights, Plate XXIV. fig. 2, might have been taken to represent a portion of the coast of Antrim in Ireland. These heights in fact consist of successive alternations of basajrancamygdaloid; and the effects of decay, upon a series of Berk which differ so considerably in firmness and durability, have produced, in India, as elsewhere, those external features, from whence, it is well known, the term Trap was originally applieikto rocks of this description. 
  The map, Plate XXIV. exhibits in one view the principal parts of India which have formed the subjects of communications hitherto presented to the Geological Society: and it must be very gratifying to perceive, notwithstanding tip small number of the persons to whom the Society is indebted for these, contributions, that a body of information has already been obtained sufficient to point out some of the leading geological features of that vast country, and to suggest to future inquirers several interesting subjects for more detailed research. The general resemblance of the fossils from the north-east of Bengal to those of the formations above the chalk in England;—the geological characters and organized contents of the great flat country on the east of central India, along the Ganges and its tributary streams ;—the relations of the lime-stones of Silhet, Laour, and Robagiri, and of Neemuck and Baug already alluded to;—and the coal formation on the banks of the Tista and Subuk rivers, are all of this description; while the specimens from the Sutluj, where that river traverses the Himalaya mountains, establish the identity of the rocks composing that stupendous chain, with those of the primary ranges in all other parts of the world hitherto examined.
The map is partially coloured, for the purpose of designating some of the tracts referred to and described in the present Volume, and in the fifth Volume of the Transactions of the Society: which contain also,—besides the papers relating to the portion of India included in the map,—a memoir of Dr. Davy on the Island of Ceylon; of Mr. B. Babington, on the route from Tellicherry to Madras; and a notice by Mr. Jack, on the Islands of Penang and Singapore.—These valuable contributions from the most important of the British colonies, are, it is to be hoped, an earnest of the geological information that may be expected by this Society from the continued activity of its members, and of other British subjects, who are engaged in the service of their country in distant quarters of the globe.

