Remarks tending to explain the Geological History of the Earth. By Professor Esmark.*
If we carry back our investigations with regard to the structure of the earth to its original formation, we find all involved in thick darkness. There have not been wanting, however, ingenious men, who have formed theories on this subject; we find some of these even among the Greek philosophers. Among these, two opposite opinions especially prevailed; some considered fire as the chief agent in this process; others water. Anaxarchus from Lampascus averred, that in his country the mountains had stood under water. Aristotle, Eratosthenes, Strabo, and Plutarch, supported his opinion. In later times, nobody doubts this fact, as we find petrified animals on the highest mountains. In America, such have been found on the Andes, at the height of 12,000 Rhenish feet above the level of the sea -f-. At first it was believed that these petrifactions were remains of the general deluge; but a more accurate investigation discovered, that they could not all be derived from this source; for, as we find on the highest mountains, and inclosed in the bowels of the earth, petrifactions of animals in every stage of their growth, and arranged in classes such as we still find alive in the sea, it may be readily inferred, that the duration of the flood was not sufficient to produce that amazing multitude of organic forms, the remains of which are now to be found in the bosom of the earth, but that these places must have once been the bottom of the sea.
In considering these petrifactions with attention, we may observe the following peculiarities among them:—
1. That the greater part of these petrifactions consist of sea animals and sea plants.
Colonel Gerard found many ammonites at a height of 16,200 feet above the sea, in the Himalya range of mountains.
3. That they are not all of the same sort.
3. That they have not all been deposited at the same time, but at periods far remote from one another.
4. That those which belong to the earliest periods have a less perfect organization, the farther back the less perfect; that those on the contrary which have been found in mountains of a later formation, have a more perfectly developed organization.
5. That we find a multitude of petrifactions of different animals which are now totally extinct, and that we find others which have some resemblance to animals now existing; but with differences which prove them to be of another species.
6. That we likewise find a great multitude of plants incorporated with the solid strata, of which some are different from those which now exist, while a great many seem to resemble them. The most remarkable circumstance connected with this fact is, that the climate of those places where these plants are found inclosed in the solid rocks, is not at all like the climate where they are now found growing. We find, for example, a multitude of plants in a state of petrifaction in the most northerly regions of Europe, which are now found growing in the torrid zone. As they are found with stalks and leaves, and sometimes even with fruit upon them, they must necessarily have grown in the places where they are now found, and could not have been wafted on the surface of the sea from regions lying far distant.
7. That of the human race, we find, with certainty, no remains inclosed in the earth, with the exception of a few which have been found partly in tuffaceous limestone, partly in clefts of older mountains which have since been filled up with sand, clay, and rubbish, and which must be considered as remains of the latest revolutionary changes in the earth.
We find a variety of theories formed in later times on this subject, by Burnet, Whiston, Woodward, Fontanelle, De Luc, Ray, Hutton, &c. They have each their own peculiar notions; and though it cannot be said that any one of them is right, this will be a matter of no surprise, when we consider how far behind they were in many of the sciences which have made such progress during the last century. Though from this progress in mineralogy, chemistry, physical, mathematical, and astronomical science, we stand on much higher ground than they did, l
there is still much remaining which we cannot explain, with regard to the original formation of the earth, and the successive revolutions it has undergone, especially as we find that all these took place prior to the existence of the human race. For this reason, we are not able to give a perfectly satisfactory account of the history of the creation by Moses, who, without determining the length of this period, merely says, that, " in the beginning, God created the heaven and the earth, and that the earth was without form and void." In all probability a very long period, perhaps several thousands of our present years, intervened between the creation of the world and the time when the earth had advanced so far in the arrangement of its parts as to be capable of exhibiting signs of organization. By a day and a night, we now understand the period of the earth's revolution round its axis; by a year, the revolution of the earth in its orbit round the sun. Moses says, that the light was first formed, and that that was the first day. On the third day after this, the sun and moon were formed. As we have now no light but what comes either immediately from the sun himself, or by reflection from the moon; and as there was light, and likewise day and night before the sun and moon were formed, we must infer that the day here mentioned has been of a different character from our day, and that this light had a different source from an immediate communication from the sun. We may therefore conclude, that during the period of the incipient formation of the earth, it had possessed a light peculiar to its own constitution, such as we shall afterwards find exhibited in the case of other heavenly bodies in a similar stage of their formation.
For this purpose, let us cast a glance over the solar system, stating such phenomena as may assist in explaining this formation of the earth. On viewing this system, besides the earth, which completes its circuit round the sun in a period which we can exactly calculate, there are several other globes, some of them larger than the earth, and some of them smaller, which revolve round the sun likewise in a determined period, some of them longer than that of the earth, and some of them shorter. Besides these bodies, the planets, with their satellites or moons, there belong also to thesolar system a multitude of comets. There are several phenomena by which these last are distinguished from the planets. They revolve like them round the sun, but in much more eccentric orbits. The period of the revolution of a comet is very different from one century to another.* Their greatest distance from the sun is so immense, that if men could exist upon them, they would not see the sun for thousands of years, and the degree of cold must be such, that if there were sea or water upon them, it must be in a state of ice. When these bodies are advancing to their perihelium, and at different distances approach nearer the earth, we observe that they are not only surrounded by a luminous atmosphere, but that they have likewise a long luminous tail, both of which become the greater the nearer they come to the sun, decreasing in the same manner as they remove from him to a greater distance. With regard to this increase and decrease of light too, we observe a difference among them. In the case of some of them, almost the whole mass of the comet is changed into this luminous elastic atmosphere and tail; in others we perceive a distinct red nucleus, which, on its approach to the sun, has a less expanded atmosphere and tail. These atmospheres, and still more the tails, are so thin and elastic, that, without the least obstruction, we can see through them the lesser stars. Counsellor Huth has calculated, that the luminous matter in the tail of the great comet of1811, was a million of times rarer than our atmosphere at the surface of the sea. The volume of its tail he computed to be 2000 times the bulk of the sun, and the diameter of its nucleus to be eighteen times that of the earth. Bessel calculates the period of its revolution to be 3383 years. Herschel has accurately observed this comet, and, among other things, he concludes, that its light was peculiar to itself. The colour of its nucleus was greenish, or a bluish green, and the nucleus or head was not in the centre of the atmosphere, which was most expanded on that side turned to the sun. The radius of the atmosphere he makes to be about 322,000 English miles, and the length of the tail more than 100 millions. By continued observations on this comet, he found that it underwent actual physical changes in its structure, and that it was globular. On its approach to the sun, his light and heat seemed to produce chemical effects upon it; he believed that it revolved on its axis. By comparing this comet with that of 1807, he concludes, that every time comets approach their perihelium, they come nearer and nearer to the sun; that, therefore, the comet of 1807 had several times been in its perihelium, it being 25 million of times nearer the sun than the comet of 1811. Its tail was only 9 millions of miles long, whereas that of 1811 was 91 millions. The effect of the sun on the latter was much greater than on the other, and it had probably seldom or never before been in its perihelium; whereas, on the contrary, the comet of 1807, in consequence of having been several times in its perihelium, must be more advanced in its growth, and matured. By comparing likewise the constitution of the great comet, with a smaller one in the same year 1811, he found that the smaller one was much more complete, and approached nearer the nature of a planet than the great comet, as the influence of the sun upon its perihelium, was not much greater than his influence on a planet in the same situation.
I have made these remarks on the nature of comets, and this comparison of some of them, for the sake of introducing certain considerations, drawn from facts, which I consider as a proof that our earth, in its rude and undigested state, has been a comet. Of this hypothesis, I shall state, in what follows, several strong proofs in phenomena which occur in our own country.
Whiston, in his Theory of the Earth, supposes that it has originally been a comet, or the atmosphere of a comet, which, in its course round the sun, has moved in a very eccentric ellipse; that, of course, in its perihelium, it has been subjected to a very high degree of heat, and in its aphelium, to an equally strong degree of cold; that, in the one of these situations, it was vitrified by the heat, in the other covered with ice; that, by degrees, its orbit has gradually changed from this long ellipse, to that almost circular path in which it now moves on the whole, at a much smaller distance from the sun. How far does this agree with the phenomena which we can observe on our

globe? With regard first to the change in the form of its orbit, this must be a matter of very difficult proof; to accomplish such a change, requires a period of incalculable length, and if it has taken place to such a degree, we ought to find the change still going on, approaching nearer and nearer toa circular orbit. By the period of the earth's annual revolution round the sun, we cannot ascertain this point; for though this continues 365| days without change, every day, every hour, every second, may be shorter, without our being able to discover this. La Place computes, that, since the time of Hipparchus, who lived about 900 years ago, the year has become some few seconds shorter. However inconsiderable this quantity may be, it proves a real change. Probably the change was greater at first, diminishing as the orbit of the earth approaches a circular form. Does the present physical constitution of the earth, and the phenomena which occur on it, countenance the idea of the orbit of the earth having at first been a long ellipse? From our present knowledge of chemistry and mineralogy, we cannot adopt the idea of Whiston, that, in its perihelium, the earth underwent a process of vitrification, in the sense in which we now understand the word. The solid body of our globe consists of various minerals, composed of different kinds of earth, combined together in certain proportions. In former times, these were considered as simple bodies, or, as they were called, elements. But by the discoveries of the illustrious chemists Davy and Berzelius, it has been found, that not only potass and natron, but that all kindsof earths, which we formerly considered as simple, are compound bodies, each species consisting of a peculiar base, with a fixed proportion ofoxygen.
The form of the earth, a spheroid compressed at the poles, proves, 1st, That, at its original formation, it was in a state of perfect fluidity. 2d, That to account for this figure, it must have revolved on its axis with more velocity than it does now, as it is higher at the equator, and more compressed at the poles, than it ought to be from the laws of gravity with its present velocity. From its original fluidity, all sorts of mineral bodies must have been dissolved in a fluid medium. When we assume that a body undergoes combustion in being combined with oxygen, by which it is by no means to be considered as destroyed or annihilated, and that a burnt body is a body combined with a certain quantity of oxygen; then, since all sorts of minerals are composed of particular kinds of earth, combined with a certain proportion of oxygen, our globe must, at certain times, have undergone a state of combustion. This agrees entirely with its present constitution; and as it appears that comets, during the time of their perihelium, undergo decompositions and combustions, we may conclude, that the earth, during one or several perihelia, has passed from its fluid to its present, as we may call it, burnt state. Its original fluidity can scarcely be denied; but the fluid substance of which it was composed, and in which all other things were dissolved, cannot have been of the same nature with our present water, which is incapable of holding such a multitude of mineral bodies in a state of solution. We are therefore entitled to conclude, that, at the time when the solid masses of the globe were decomposed, the fluid medium which held them in solution was also decomposed and converted into a different character. The peculiar fluids found in cavities, in rocks and minerals, may, when strictly examined, give us some information as to the original fluid in which the matter of the strata was dissolved. During this state of combustion, an immense quantity of light must have been disengaged, as we see takes place with other comets at the time of their perihelium. As we find thus, that both fire and water have acted a part during the period of the earth's first formation, we may, in this manner, without inconsistency, combine the two opinions which have been opposed to one another on this subject.
And now, with regard to the other part of Whiston's theory, he assumes, that, during the period of its aphelium, the earth was covered with ice and snow. At first view, it seems not likely that we should be able to exhibit any proof of this. But besides its extreme probability, we shall find actual proofs that the earth has been covered with ice and snow. In our own Norway, so rich in geognostic phenomena, there are to be found unquestionable proofs of this. In reading geognostic and other works, containing descriptions of particular countries, we rarely meet with observations, from which the authors were led to draw this conclusion. Sir James Hall, in his remarks on the changes on the surface of our planet, and on the huge masses of rock which are found about Geneva, and the coast of the Baltic, and the formations of the vast sand-plains which are found in Holland and in the north of Germany, infers that not only strong currents, but ice likewise, must have had a share in producing these effects. There are not wanting many facts to confirm the conclusion that ice has worked prodigious changes on mountain masses, and conveyed from them large rocks into regions, where now no perennial ice is to be found, at a great distance from the mountains, from which they must have come. Men have often had recourse to extraordinary exertions of the powers of nature in explaining these phenomena. Thus has De Luc endeavoured to account for them by the eruption of gaseous fluids from the bowels of the earth, which have burst the mountains, and scattered the loosened fragments to a great distance around. The huge masses of granite which are to be found on the limestone mountains of the Jura range, and which have evidently come from the Alps of Switzerland, though there lie deep valleys between the Alps and the Jura mountains, have been a riddle to many, especially as they are found very high up on the slope of the hills, and not in the bottom of the valley. Some, as I have mentioned, wish to explain this by a projectile power. Dolomieu imagines that there has been formerly a continued slope from the top of the Alps to the Jura hills, on which these rocky masses have descended from the one to the other, and that the present intervening valleys have been hollowed out by more recent revolutions. A few suppose that these masses have been brought to their present situation by ice. According to Von Buch this is a very general opinion in Switzerland. It is not only in mountainous regions we find this phenomenon, but also in flat alluvial districts, where these rocky masses lie upon gravel and sand, a circumstance which cannot be explained in any other way, than by their having been brought thither in combination with masses of ice. It cannot be admitted that they could be brought to such situations by torrents of water, for the same torrents which could have been capable of bringing such masses of rock, must at the same time have carried off the gravel and sand
• Vide Sir James Hall's Memoirs, in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
on which they rest. One needs only to travel through the plains of Denmark, to perceive how improbable the supposition is, that such masses could be placed where they are by water. In short, in every country, whether it be mountainous or flat, we shall find similar traces of the operation of masses of ice. The prominent conglomerations to be found in many districts, may be easily accounted for in the same manner. But it is particularly in Norway I have found many proofs of the operation of immense masses of ice which have now disappeared.
1. As in other countries we find large loose rocky masses lying spread over pretty level plains; for example, in travelling from Marstuen, on theMiosen, to Leuten in Hedemark. These must have been brought from a great distance, for there are in the neighbourhood no mountains of the same character as these masses.
2. In no other satisfactory way than by the operation of ice can we explain how those prodigiously large loose stones, sometimes with sharp corners, have been brought up to the ridges and tops of high mountains, which are found in such numbers in the province of Christians. The first time I met with such single loose blocks lying on the ridge of the high mountains in Numedal, I thought they must be the remains of strata, or of masses which had covered the mountain, and which had in after-times been decomposed and carried off by water, leaving those traces of their former existence. But, on examining them more closely, I found that this account of the matter would not do, for I found that, in their internal structure, many of these stones neither corresponded with one another, nor with the mountain mass on which they rested. By the assistance of immense masses of ice, on the other hand, it is easy to conceive how they could have been brought from a great distance, and pushed high up on the mountains.
3. In travelling over our mountainous districts, especially in Osterdal, it will be frequently found that the slope of the mountain towards the valley is covered with large loose stones, mixed with a great quantity of loose sand and gravel, and that this covering extends to a considerable height overthe bottom of the valley. If we consider attentively this mixture of large loose stones and gravel, we shall find that these could not have been produced and brought hither by any current of water descend ing through the valley, and depositing these larger and smaller remains of the ruins of the mountains; for the current which brought down the large masses, and deposited them there, could not possibly, at the same time, have deposited the finer sand and gravel, but must have carried it down to places where the influence of the current was less powerful. We may indeed suppose that two different currents at different times might produce this mixture; that the first and largest current deposited the large stones, and that a later and less powerful current deposited the gravel and sand. At first view this supposition seems not improbable; but, on a closer examination of this mixture, we shall find that it is not consistent with fact, for if a mighty current had brought down and deposited the large stones in the first instance, they must in that case rest upon one another, without any thing interposed between them, and the gravel, brought down and deposited by the succeeding current, could only have filled up the surrounding cavities; whereas, on the contrary, we find the large stones lying separated from one another, surrounded by sand and gravel, a circumstance which cannot be explained in another way than by supposing that the whole has formerly been filled up with ice, which has pushed the whole mixed mass up the slope of the mountain. The water of the ice, afterwards thawing, carried off by its rapid streams a part of the stones and gravel, which were then heaped together, deeper down in the valley: these heaps resemble entirely those which glaciers carry before them.
4. We come now to the fourth and the strongest proof, that immense masses of ice have formerly existed in Norway, in places where now no perennial ice is to be found. When I last summer (1823) undertook a journey to Stavanger, to examine the Union Copper Works, which have been commenced and again given up, I made an excursion from the dwelling-house of Fossan, which Pontoppidan, in his map, calls Fossland, in Holle Annex, in the parish of Strand, to examine a branch of the works at Vasbotten, about a quarter of a mile (more than li English miles) north-east from Fossan. The road went first over some cultivated ground, ascending a little, but after between four and five thousand paces it went over a large level sandy plain. This plain was overspread with a multitude of tumuli, that had been all opened. Urburhill, which reaches out to the sea, lay upon the right hand, and, on advancing farther over the plain, you see the dwelling-house of Howkelie, at a little distance to the right, in a valley which stretches up into the hill. At the upper end this sandy plain was bounded by a glacier-dike or rampart, which extended across the whole valley. As this glacier dike is remarkable, and, so far as I know, the only one of its kind lying close to the level of the sea, in a district* where you find only a few heaps of perpetual snow in hollows of the mountains, where it slopes to the north-east, at the height of from two to three thousand Rhenish feet above the sea, I must be a little more particular in describing it. Its length across the valley, from mountain to mountain, is 2250 feet, its perpendicular height above the plain 100. At one of the ends where it approaches to the mountain, it is broken through, so that there the highest part of its brink is not above twelve feet higher than the plain. This opening or breach is not above 200 feet broad. The dike itself consists of coarse gravel and sand, mixed with a great number of immense blocks of gneiss, which is the prevailing kind of rock in the mountain. We find this gravel and sand not only heaped up across the valley, but pushed up in great quantity on the opposite side of the dike, to the length of 1400 feet towards the mountain.
The whole bottom of the valley is covered with a lake, which is called Howkelie Water, of the same breadth as the length of the dike, and extending about ten thousand feet up the valley. The people in the neighbourhood say that it is one hundred fathoms deep. As the surface of the lake is only ten feet higher than the plain on the other side of the dike, and as this, therefore, where it is lowest, is two feet higher than the surface of the lake, there can be no run from it on this quarter. The water has its outgate at the other end, by a fall of a few feet, into a similar lake, and from this again, by a little fall at Vasbotten, it passes into a larger lake, called Ejewater, from which it soon after runs into Lyseford. These three lakes lie in a semicircle.
From this description it will be easy to see that this dike could have been formed only by masses of ice, which must have filled up the whole valley, and, by their spreading and pressure, have hollowed out its bottom. In all probability the water of the melted ice, at a late period, burst through the dike, and for a while had its issue through the opening, and its present outlet either did not then exist, or was filled up with ice and gravel. On the plain below we find not a trace of the gravel carried down from the dike, a thing of course not to be expected, when we think of a torrent 200 feet in breadth rushing out with violence. Not only the dike itself, but the whole horizontal surface, exhibits proofs that there has been a glacier here, for the plain exactly resembles those which I found adjoining to the glaciers presently existing between Londfiord and Lomb, in Guldbrandsdal, where I had likewise occasion to travel last summer. The resemblance is so striking, that every one who has an opportunity of making the comparison, must form the same opinion. As a proof of this I may mention, that Mr O. Tank, a skilful young mineralogist, who visited with me the dike of which I have given the description, and afterwards accompanied me to the glaciers, I have just mentioned, on seeing the latter, without having heard a hint on the subject from me, he immediately exclaimed that the dike we had seen at Stavanger must be a glacier dike.
As I think that what I have stated will be sufficient to prove that the Norwegian mountains have been covered with ice down to the level of the sea, and therefore that the sea itself must have been frozen, we may from this find the reason why the Norwegian mountains in general are so steep, I may say perpendicular, on the sides which hang over the valleys, not only in the valleys which are high above the level of the sea, but in those from the bottom of which the waters run into the Norwegian Fiords (Firths).-]- Ice, or glaciers, by their immense expanding powers, must, beyond doubt, have produced this change in their original form, from this circumstance, that they were continually sliding downwards from the higher mountains to the lower districts, and, by this progressive motion, carried with them the masses of stone which they had torn from the mountains. It is easy to explain why no trace of these masses thus separated is to be found immediately below the precipices thus formed.
As these mountain precipices are often from three, four, to five thousand feet high, and the valleys over which they hang are likewise several thousand feet in breadth, it must be a matter of astonishment to think of such valleys being filled with ice to the extent of several miles. This ice in lower districts must have stretched a long way out into the sea, and, on its thawing, large masses must have broke loose, and gone out to sea, as we find takes place now in the polar regions. I have no hesitation in affirming this, when I survey the effects of immense masses of ice, where there is no room to be mistaken.
I shall further mention the supposed effects of glacier ice in another part of Norway, at the level of the sea.
Last summer I went by sea from Bergen to Sondfiord and Nordfiord, on the outside of the Scars (the rocks which lie along the shore), to examine thepetrifactions which Pontoppidan talks of in his Natural History of Norway, as to be found in Steensund, in the island of Gule, at the beginning of the61° of north latitude. I went on shore at different places; and although I carefully examined every place around, I found not a trace of petrifaction. On the contrary, I found that the part of the continent separated from it by the Sound, and the island of Inner or Easter Lule, consisted of a solid conglomerate, composed of boulders, from the size of a pea to that of a man's head. These boulders consisted chiefly of gneiss, quartz, and clayslate, which were involved and bound together in a mass so solid, that it was difficult to find out what the binding medium was, as the interstices between the large stones were completely filled up with small boulders. On closer examination, at particular spots, I found that this binding medium was chlorite and hard clay.
On this rock there seemed to me proofs of the powerful operation of ice. I found that the precipices on the side of the mountain next the Sound were several feet in height, and perfectly perpendicular; and though they were composed, as I have mentioned, of boulders cemented together, they were perfectly even and smooth. If these precipices had been the effect of rents, attended with successive masses tumbling down, then the boulders' adjoining the rent must have been found adhering sometimes to the one and sometimes to the other of the separated masses, (those which have fallen into the sea are no more to be seen); and, in that case, the boulders left in one mass must have left a mark of itself in the corresponding one. This, however, was by no means the case, as the rock which remained was perfectly smooth, and had the appearance as if these boulders had been cut across by a sharp knife. I can explain this phenomenon in no other way than by supposing, that large masses of ice pressing through the Sound, have cut these precipices lying parallel to the direction of the Sound.
I could give other proofs of the conclusion I have sought here to establish, but, to persons capable of judging of the matter, I consider these as sufficient.
The result of what I have said I may state in the following particulars.
1. That, in the beginning, the earth existed in a fluid state.
2. That, during the long period it required to assume its proper composition and form, it has alternately been, at one time, at such a distance from the sun, that all the water upon it must have necessarily been converted into ice; at another so near it, that not only the solid earth and minerals underwent a change, but also the fluid substance which held them in solution was decompounded and changed. How deep these changes went into the body of the earth we have yet no means of ascertaining. By comparing the phenomena of burning volcanoes with the combustion of themetalloids, kalium, natrium, silicium, calcicum, we may conclude, that, deep in the bowels of the earth, there is to be found a multitude of specific metalloids, the combustion of which is the cause of the eruptions of volcanoes.
3. That organisation did not begin till this long period was
completed, which the earth required to the full development of its own constitution; that, after it began, it proceeded by successive steps from the less to the more perfect formations, ending with man as the head of the whole.
