In a paper published in the Annals of Philosophy for November and December 18241, I gave an account of the order and characters of the strata which occur beneath the chalk on the coast of part of the Isle of Wight and of Dorsetshire, and stated some reasons for supposing that a similar arrangement would be found to exist in the interior of England.
The principal objects of that paper were; First, to distinguish as a separate group, the series of strata now called the Lower Green-sand;—which had previously been confounded either with the beds containing green particles immediately below the chalk, or with the sandy and ferruginous strata conspicuously exhibited on the coast at Hastings, and then called “ Iron-sand. Secondly, to indicate more clearly than had been done before, the peculiar characters of the group, which succeeds in a descending order to that just mentioned, and is remarkably distinguished by its fossils from the strata immediately in apposition with it, both above and below. For this latter group, which includes the Weald clay, the sand of Hastings, and the Purbeck limestone, and is well entitled to a separate denomination, I have adopted the name of “ Wealden,” proposed by Mr. Martin, in his valuable memoir on the West of Sussex.
(2.) The objects of the inquiries which have produced the following pages were, to compare some portions of the series of strata between the chalk and the Oxford oolite, in different parts of the South-east of England; to ascertain the existence of the Wealden in the interior; and, if possible, to determine its boundaries.
In stating the result of this investigation, I shall give a series of sections of the strata below the chalk, at places which I have myself examined, beginning on the coast near Folkstone, and following the outline of the chalk thence to the sea on the N. West of Norfolk. The relative situation of these places is shown in the map annexed to this paperf. The intermediate country, in general, I have not examined in detail, and some points of importance I have never seen; but those who may have opportunities of continuing the inquiry, will find, I hope, no difficulty in connecting their observations with mine.
(3.) The series of strata about to be described extends from the Chalk down to the Oxford oolite or coral-rag, and is composed of alternating but irregularly distributed beds of Sand, Clay, and Stone.
Among the sandy strata, it is important to discriminate not only between the Lower green-sand and that of Hastings, but to distinguish both from a third group, consisting principally of sand abounding in green particles, which lies beneath the Portland stone.
Clay, of several varieties, occurs in all parts of this series; but three groups, constituting the Gault, the Weald-clay, and the Kimmeridge-clay, derive peculiar importance from their generally occupying valleys, or depressions, at the foot of the escarpments of the Chalk, the Lower green-sand, and the Portland stone, respectively, and thus producing conspicuous natural features in the tracts where this succession is observable.
The stone of the tracts under consideration is either limestone; indurated sand-rock; chert; or siliceous matter intimately mixed with carbonate of lime, in the form of grit,—which has commonly a concretional structure, and seems to pass into continuous beds only by the approach and ultimate union of the concretions.
But the most remarkable distinction, in the suite described in this paper,arises from the great difference of character in the organized remains which the principal groups include. The fossils of the chalk and green-sands and those of the Portland stone, are all marine, and the species numerous. But in the Wealden, between the lower green-sand and the Portland stone, although the fossils are abundant as to quantity, the species are comparatively few, and by far the greater part of them belongs to fresh water. The whole of the phenomena, in short, presented by this remarkable assemblage of beds, are such as to accord with the hypothesis of their having been deposited in fresh water communicating with the sea.
(4.) Combining these sources of distinction, the following arrangement and subdivisions may be adopted, the nomenclature of which, however exposed to criticism, is now probably too well established to be changed without inconvenience.
(5.) I proceed now to describe the Sections of these strata, beginning with the coast of Kent; and 1 shall connect with each section a list of such fossils as I have either found myself, or obtained on good authority from the places mentioned. The whole of the shells in these lists have been examined and named by Mr. James Sowerby, by whom also the drawings of the supposed new species were made, and the annexed engravings executed']'. It is right to mention this explicitly, both that I may take the opportunity of expressing my acknowledgments for Mr. Sowerby's valuable and assiduous cooperation,— and that, being myself but very slightly acquainted with Conchology, I may place the portion of the following pages which relates to that subject on better authority than my own.
Vicinity of Folkstone, Kent.
(6.) The small map, (Plate VII. fig. 1.,) reduced from the Ordnance Survey, represents the country in the immediate neighbourhood of Folkstone and Sandgate,—the relative position of this tract being shown on the general map, (Plate IX.). The View (Plate VIII.), for which I am indebted to the kindness of my friend the Rev. J. D. Glennie of Sandgate, shows the actual appearance of the coast from Eastware Bay to Hythe; and the section (Plate X a. No. 1.) illustrates the succession of the strata, on a part of the shore which is not distinctly visible in the more direct view from the sea.
(7.) The chalk cliffs in the vicinity of Dover have been described in detail by the late Mr. William Phillips ; and the presence of the upper green-sand which had escaped the notice of Mr. Phillips, has been pointed out by Mr. De Basterotf. These, with Mr. Conybeare’s more general description |, and Mr. William Smith’s coloured map of Kent, are the only modern geological illustrations of this part of England with which I am acquainted. But there is a publication of much earlier date,—Packe’s “Chart of East Kent,” with its explanatory memoir entitled ArK0rPAd>IA, printed in 1743, which, though not strictly geological in its immediate object, points out very correctly the connexion between the external features and the disposition of the strata in the tract to which it relates, and contains such excellent views in physical geography as to demand especial notice in this place§.
(8.) As the chalk rises, in proceeding from Dover towards Folkstone, the upper beds disappear; the cliffs represented in the view and section consisting entirely of the lower members of that stratum. The rise of the marly chalk above the sea level occurs about a mile and a half to the east of the escarpment of Folkstone hill, and the place is well marked by the breaking out of a very copious and perennial spring, called “Lydden Spout,” which issues from the top of these marly beds;—a situation probably corresponding to that of the springs which everywhere appear in the interior, along the foot of the chalk range. Near the “Spout” the cliff is about 430 feet high; the upper part consisting of very white chalk, with a bed of flint nodules, the rest of chalk without flints, gradually assuming a greyer hue as it descends. About the middle of the cliff a thick bed has acquired by exposure a rough and darker surface, by the aid of which it can be traced towards the west; and on the shore there are numerous detached masses, composed of round portions of grey marly chalk united by a yellowish-brown cement. The shore itself, at this place, is a firm floor of light bluish grey marl, the beds beneath being of a still darker hue. The vertical face of the cliff retires from the sea about 2000 paces west of Lydden Spout; and the intermediate shore, thence to Copt Point, is occupied by a mass of ruin, which has fallen from above, in consequence of the rise and erosion of the soft argillaceous beds beneath. The sudden transition to this ruinous under-cliff from the vertical face of chalk is very remarkable. A stratum abounding in green particles, intimately mixed with marl, appears at low water, in several detached places on the shore west of Lydden Spout, and is succeeded by the blue clay of the gault, which continues to Copt Point, where it rests upon the sand and grit of lower green-sand :—the prominence of the Point itself, and of the shore to the west of it, being evidently produced by the greater firmness and durability of the latter stratum.
The succession of the beds is best seen in the retiring portion of the shore, immediately on the north of Copt Point, (see Plate X a. No. 1.) A small outlier of the lowest chalk, with green-sand beneath it, is there exposed at the summit of the rounded hill on which stands the Martello Tower No. 3. Copt Point itself consists almost entirely of gault, w hich tops the low cliff thence to the village of Folkstone. The lower green-sand, rising gradually from the Point, occupies the whole cliff west of the village ; and being continued without interruption, through Sandg,ate and in the heights above Hythe, its outcrop turns from the coast into the interior, at Aldington Corner. Finally, the Weald- clay, rising on the shore beneath Shorn Cliff, occupies the greater part of the heights and sloping ground on which the town of Hythe is placed, and extends about four miles farther to the west, where it gives place to the Hastings-sands.
In my obervations on this part of the coast, I shall confine myself to the beds below the chalk; referring for a detailed account of that stratum to Mr. W. Phillips’s paper, already mentioned.
(9.) Upper Green-sand. The upper green-sand near Folkstone, is but a scanty representative of the formation, as it occurs in the Isle of Wight, Surrey, Western Sussex, and some other places in the interior; its total thickness probably not exceeding five-and-twenty or thirty feet, and the stony strata and concretions of chert being altogether wanting. Its rise upon the shore is concealed; and the stratum is first seen in its proper situation beneath the Martello Tower No. 2. A small outlying portion about fourteen feet in thickness, occurs beneath a cap of grey chalk marl about eight feet thick, at the top of the hill on which the Tower No. 3. is placed; and in this place the stratum consists of a soft marly sand, traversed in every direction by stem-like cylinders, which have within them cores of darker green matter. It also contains some irregular masses of a bright brown or orange hue; but the greater part is composed of grey calcareous marl, like the lowest chalk, so thickly interspersed with green particles as to exhibit only their colour.
The fossils which I found in this stratum were few in number, and indistinct: the only species that could be ascertained was the Pecten orbicularis, one of the characteristic shells of the lower chalk and upper greensand in Hampshire and Western Sussex.
(10.) The green matter, which abounds in this stratum near Wissant, on the opposite coast of France, has been examined by M. Berthier; who found it to consist principally of silica and protoxide of iron, with ten per cent, of potash. For the purpose of comparing the green-sands of different places and formations, my friend Dr. Turner, Professor of Chemistry in the London University, was good enough to examine some specimens from the upper and lower green-sands of Folkstone, of the Vale of Wardour, and the Boulonnois, and also particles of the same kind which abound in the sand and concretions beneath the Portland stone, in the Boulonnois, and in England. I subjoin the result of this examination whence it appears that in all these cases the green matter is of the same nature. A slight examination of the green particles, which Sir John Herschel had previously the goodness to make for me, intimated the same results.
(J1.) Gault. The rise of this stratum on the shore is also obscured by ruins of the superior beds; but it is visible in detached points, at low water, in Eastware Bay, and forms the greater part of the cliff at Copt Point, where many of the more beautiful specimens of the Gault fossils, seen in collections, have been obtained. It appears also below the outlier of the upper greensand already mentioned; and occupies nearly the whole of the grassy and ruinous cliff between the base of the Martello Tower No. 2, and the sea. Its total thickness is about 130 feet, and it may be divided into even by the nitro-muriatic. It gives out water when heated, and becomes brown from its iron passing into the state of peroxide. As it has been supposed to owe its green colour to the presence of phosphoric acid, it was carefully examined, with the view of detecting that acid, if present. It was accordingly fused with carbonate of soda, the alkaline filtered solution neutralized by nitric acid, and evaporated to dryness, and the neutral solution tested by nitrate of silver and nitrate of lead. Of two samples of green-sand, thus examined, one was found to be quite free from phosphoric acid, and traces only were detected in the other. The former was also free from lime, and the latter contained but a small portion. It is hence obvious, that neither lime nor phosphoric acid are essential constituents of the colouring matter of green-sand, and their presence must be regarded as casual.
The upper part immediately succeeding the upper green-sand contains green particles; and thence, for some feet downwards, it is harsh and sandy. The lower portion consists of a smooth, uniform, very plastic clay, of a light bluish grey colour, much in request for the fabrication of tiles and common pottery. It is in this part of the cliff at Copt Point, that the perfect and beautifully iridescent Ammonites, Inocerami, Hamites, and other fossils, have been obtained. From the Point the stratum rises gradually to the west, forming the summit of the hill, about 108 feet in height, on the east of the town of Folkstone; and some traces of it also exist at the top of the next cliff, on which the church stands. From the coast the gault can be traced in a corresponding situation in the interior, along the foot of the chalk escarpment; its presence being everywhere indicated by a depression of the surface, and by the marshy aspect of the soil, which generally produces rushes and is strongly contrasted with that both of the chalk above, and of the lower green-sand beneath.
It is not improbable that in the Isle of Wight and some other situations where the fossils of the gault are rare, the upper and more sandy portion only of this stratum may exist. At Cheriton Tile-works near Folkstone, the workmen expressly state that it is the lower part only of their pits which affords the shells.
(12.) Throughout the gault, but chiefly in the inferior portion, concretions of iron pyrites are found, generally approaching to a globular or cylindrical figure, and of a radiated crystalline structure within, or in long thin vermicular rods, which at first sight might be taken for vegetable stems. On the opposite coast of France, near Wissant, the pyrites is so abundant in the gault as to have given origin, some years since, to a manufactory of sulphate of iron; but near Folkstone the quantity is comparatively inconsiderable.
 (13.) Other nodules and irregular masses are also found throughout this stratum, which resemble coprolite in their chemical composition, though no traces of animal structure are apparent in them. These are often associated with pyrites, and traversed by veins of that substance, as in septaria. Internally they are in general of a dark brownish hue, and the fracture is even or splintery, like that of some varieties of chert. The form of these nodules is sometimes very like that of coprolites; but though portions of shells are sometimes found within them, I have not detected any fragments of bone or scales of fishes. The surface of some of the detached masses is eroded, as if by worms; to the action of which, therefore, they were probably exposed before they were enveloped in the clay. In other cases they are of a very irregular figure, surrounding or incorporated with fossil remains, especially of Ammonites, the interior of which is filled with matter of the same kind.
Concretions of this description occur not only in the gault of different places, but are also numerous in the bottom of the lower green-sand at Atherfield in the Isle of Wight; and a mass found by Mr. Lyell in the crag at Southwold in Suffolk, which is mentioned by Dr. Buckland, appears to have been of similar character. The concretions of the gault in Kent evidently agree with those of Havre and Wissant, analysed by M. Berthier, and found to contain about 57 per cent, of phosphate of lime, with a considerable portion also of carbonate of limef. It can hardly be doubted that they are derived from the remains of animals, though no traces of bony texture are now perceptible ; and it is not improbable that they may have been the contents of the intestines of marine animals, which fed upon each other, though not in all cases moulded into the form of coprolite.
The abundance of phosphate of lime, especially in submarine strata, will not appear surprising, when it is recollected that not only the bones, spiculse and scales of fishes afford that substance in large quantities, but also the covering of the Echinodermata, and of crustaceous animals, in a smaller proportion.
(14.) The following is a list of the fossils of the gault in this neighbourhood, in my own collection, and in those of Mr. Hills, of Court-at-street near Lympne, of Mr. Sowerby, and some other of my friends. I take the present opportunity of expressing my obligation, especially to the Rev. Gerard E. Smith and Mr. Hills, for their kindness in supplying me with all the new species of their collections, many of which are figured in the plates annexed to this paper. Lord Greenock also has been so good as to allow me to have drawings taken from some specimens collected by himself.
 (15.) Lower Green-sand.—The uniform surface of this stratum, extensively shooting' out beyond the chalk, forms a conspicuous feature of the country, which is well seen from the ascent of Folkstone Hill on the road to Dover. The analogy in this respect to the appearance of the sands at the Black- down Hills in Devonshire, is obvious and striking. The Bagshot sands, above the chalk in Surrey, also exhibit long and uniform platforms, the section of which presents a linear and almost horizontal top, with a rapid escarpment at both extremities.
(16.) One of the principal circumstances in the internal structure of the Lower Green-sand at Folkstone, is the distinctness with which it is divided into three groups; and this subdivision probably occurs wherever the formation is fully developed in the South-east of England. It is clearly seen in Surrey; I have evidence from Mr. Martin of its existence in the West of Sussex; Mr. Lonsdale believes it to hold also near Devizes in Wiltshire; and though I did not become acquainted with it till after I had examined the Isle of Wight, I have little doubt that it will be found there also.
The first of these subdivisions may be characterized as consisting principally of sand, white, yellowish, or ferruginous, with concretions of limestone and of chert,  frequently in false stratification. It forms commonly a flat, but sometimes an irregular hilly surface, rising from the valley of the gault, and bearing a dry, barren soil.
The second member abounds in green matter, is retentive of moisture, and contains comparatively little stone: it occupies a flat and marshy tract, between the first and third divisions.
The third and lowest member contains a greater proportion of calcareous matter, and includes some of the principal beds of stone bearing the name of “Kentish Rag”; which commonly form a prominent ridge at its outcrop, adjoining the valley of the Weald.
 (17.) a. The uppermost subdivision is about seventy feet thick. It rises upon the shore on the west of Eastware Bay; and some of the firm siliceous beds which it includes near the top, coming up from the sea a little to the east of Copt Point, are continued in the cliff thence to the west of Sandgate; between which place and Folkstone distinct sections are disclosed. The greater part of the country from Folkstone, through Cheriton, to Newington is occupied by this bed, and the heights of Dibgate and Sine Farm, where it finally disappears, are capped with it.
(18.) Where the sand emerges from beneath the Gault, it is often loose, and of a white or buff colour; but at the immediate junction there occurs, in many places, a course, from six inches to a foot in thickness, of concretions of pyrites, often investing fragments of silicified coniferous wood, of a dark brown colour. The composition of this bed resembles, in several respects, that of the Blackdown sands in Devonshire, the stone which it includes consisting principally of siliceous spongy concretions, like the whetstone of that place. The most instructive specimens are to be found in the loose decomposed masses on the shore. In the vertical faces of the cliffs, the surface exposed by fracture and falling away is at first clean and uniform, no traces of the stratification appearing; but after a time the sand crumbles from the surface, while the stony portions remaining fixed, become prominent.
The whole of these cliffs consists, in fact, of sand and conglomerates more or less firm, produced by the agglutination of the loose materials which formed the original submarine deposit. The strata vary in texture and composition, from the state of sand to that of very hard limestone or chert, of various shades of grey and brown; the latter passing into chalcedony, with which the cavities are sometimes coated. The transition from the sand into compact stone is sometimes very rapid ; in other specimens the gradations are almost insensible.
(19.) The principal components of these conglomerates are the following:
Quartz, in rounded fragments, from the bulk of a large pea to the minutest visible size, of several shades of grey and white, varying from transparent to nearly opake, and in some instances passing into chalcedony.
Small, worn fragments of quartzose jasper, red, or greenish; with flat surfaces, in some cases, indicating stratification.
Fragments, frequently much larger than those above mentioned, of very compact, dark brown, black, or grey flinty slate. Sometimes the appearance of these fragments is internally that of hornstone, approaching to jasper.
Fragments, often angular, or slightly rounded, of schistose granular quartz, or sandstone, interspersed with very minute particles of mica; not effervescent; its colours varying from smoke grey to greenish.
Near Ashford, in the ferruginous sand at the top of the formation, fragments are found of brown hematitic iron ore; but much less abundantly than in the corresponding part of the section at Redcliff, nearSandown, in the Isle of Wight, and at other places.
Near the top of the sands, in the blocks of decomposed stone, upon the shore, lumps are found, from the size of a walnut downwards, of a dark brown substance, externally spongy, and of irregular surface, and within having the fracture and appearance of the phosphate of lime described in Section. In these brown masses are also some grains of quartz, and small portions of shell. This occurrence of phosphate of lime, both in the gault and at the upper part of the lower green-sand, is an additional proof of the continuity of their deposition.
(20.) The stone of the more uniform beds (Kentish-rag,”) has great variety of characters, from those of a granular or sparry compound to compact limestone, some specimens of which might be taken for that of older formations. In many cases, the calcareous cement is so crystalline, that light is reflected continuously from extensive surfaces, although the face of the fracture is thickly set with small pebbles of quartz; in other cases the stone is a dense conglomerate, composed of quartz grains with a small proportion only of the cement. All the varieties contain disseminated grains of the green matter above described in section (10); which is frequently so abundant as to give its colour to the stone. In many of the rolled fragments on the shore near Folkstonc, this constitutes more than half the compound, the remainder being decomposed carbonate of lime, inclosing grains of quartz and flinty slate. In the more advanced state of decomposition, the mass has the appearance of mortar; and, in most cases, the stone effervesces copiously with acids, the green particles remaining undissolved.
The chert of this upper stratum is frequently of a dark grey colour, and very like chalk flint. In some specimens, this dark variety adjoins, with scarcely any gradation, a light grey, or white siliceous agglomerate, in which the original sandy structure is still discernible; while in the adjacent darker chert the fracture is flat-conchoidal and splintery, with the glimmering lustre of hornstone, all trace of the grains having disappeared ;—as if a sand of wax had been consolidated by gentle softening, in a heat not sufficient for its liquefaction. In its passage to chalcedony, the siliceous matter often assumes a white colour, the aspect being nearly that of porcelain, and it becomes translucent when moistened.
(21.) A section of the upper part of this member (a) of the lower greensand, in the cliff about midway between Folkstone and Copt Point, was as follows.
Interior of Kent.
(37.) I have dwelt the longer on the description of the coast near Folkstone, on account of the distinctness with which the strata are disclosed there, and of the geological celebrity of the place; which has the advantage, also, of being easily accessible to foreigners, from its proximity to France. The details above given will supersede the necessity of minute description in many of the following sections.
The strata succeeding the chalk offer but little variety between the coast and the vicinity of Godstone, in Surrey. The Upper green-sand is throughout comparatively obscure. The gault, which in general occupies but a small and narrow valley at the foot of the chalk escarpment, is extensively unveiled at the entrance of the river gorges, and in those cases its surface is varied by hills and other inequalities. The Lower green-sand agrees generally, both as to structure and composition, with that of Folkstone, but the proportion of calcareous matter decreases from Maidstone towards the west.
 (38.) Extensive quarries have long been worked in the lowest part of the green-sand at Boughton, on the south of Maidstone., the geological relations of which are the same as at Hythe. The stone for the construction of Westminster Abbey is said to have been procured there. It is a variety of Kentish rag, like the Hythe stone, in nearly continuous beds, alternating with a soft sandrock, called by the workmen “ hassock,” and passing occasionally into chert.
At the top of these quarries irregular fissures or cavities, approaching to a conical figure, called “vents” by the workmen, are frequent. These are filled with loose rubbly stone and sandy clay. In one of them the bones of hyaenas were found, in 1827, by the late Mr. Braddick, of Boughton Mount, under circumstances like those in which similar remains occur in fissures in other parts of England. My specimens include several fragments of the long bones and jaws, with the canine and incisor teeth, some of which are much worn down by use; and these are accompanied by Album Grcecum f.
Fragments of chalk-flints are found upon the surface near Boughton, about four miles and a half from the outcrop of the chalk: a fact which deserves attention, as such remains of the superior strata have been supposed either not to occur, or to be extremely rare, within the space between the North and South Downs.
(39.) The manner in which the rivers make their way to the sea, by an apparently unnatural course, across the ridges both of the chalk and the inferior strata, is one of the most interesting points in the general structure of Kent; and has been already dwelt upon by Mr. ConybeareJ, Mr. Scrope, and Mr. Martin.
(40.) The great variation in width of the space occupied by the strata between the chalk and the Weald clay is another very prominent feature of this part of the country; and though it arises,, in part, from the extensive denudation at the entrance of the gorges where the principal rivers traverse the chalk ridge, yet even if these were filled up, and the range of the downs between the coast and Dorking rendered uniform, the space occupied by the lower strata would be found to vary considerably. The chief cause of this irregularity is the difference of the angles at which the strata rise in different places ; the heights also which the sands attain, having a proportionate variation.
(41.) In the upper part of the Lower green-sand between Sevenoaks and Godstone, a ridge or saddle can be traced for several miles, in a direction nearly parallel to that of the central range of the Hastings sands, its course being from about 10° south of west to 10° north of east. The places where I have seen the structure of this ridge most distinctly, are on a line passing from Montreal Park, through Sundridge, to the grounds of Brasted Place, in the course of which several sections have been exposed. The strata consist of yellowish and somewhat ferruginous sand, and hassock,” including beds of a bluish stone, like that of the Boughton quarries and the vicinity of Folkstone : the fossils, also, are the same.
The ridge just mentioned is probably continued eastward ; but my observations in that direction did not extend beyond a place called Cold Harbour,immediately on the west of Montreal Park, where the beds rise towards the south, at an angle of about 20°; the bend, also, or summit of the ridge being there exposed, on the verge of a small wood, but less distinctly than at Brasted Place, hereafter mentioned. Its continuity, however, is in several places interrupted by breaks or openings, from 50 to 100 paces in width, where a uniform surface at a much lower level is continued from north to south, across the direction; as if the ridge had been cut away in those places, or wide transverse fissures had been partially filled up and levelled over. The first of these breaks is about sixty paces from west to east, and the summits of the heights which it separates are about seventy feet above their base. The strata, which form the southern slope of the ridge, dip southwards at an angle of about 45°, and the apparent distance (or chord of the curve) from the beginning of the rise on either side is rather more than a furlong. The wood near Cold Harbour is full of old quarries, which seem to have been dug into the top of the saddle.
(42.) A very good view of these elevated strata is disclosed on the east of a Jane which strikes off' from the main road between Bessell’s Green and Sun- dridge, passing Dry Hill Farm; quarries having been opened there in two detached points, marked A and B in the subjoined sketch. It is difficult to estimate the width of the ridge at this place from north to south, its terminations not being distinct, at either extremity, but it seems to be about 1200 paces.
At the more northern of these quarries, A, the beds are distinctly, but slightly, curved; and the strike is not parallel to the general course of the ridge, but runs from about 16° east of north to 16° west of south ; forming, with the direction of the ridge, an angle of about 64°. At the second quarry, B, (of which a sketch on a larger scale is given below,) both sides of the saddle are visible within the distance of a few paces, the beds on the north rising at an angle of about 60°, while on the south they decline at an angle of about 45°.
In the southern portion of this section, which is about twenty-two paces in length, and twenty-five feet high, I counted twenty-two beds of concre- tional stone alternating with sand, and varying in thickness from eighteen inches to nine.
A second break or open space, like those above mentioned, (p. 133.), occurs immediately on the west of Sundridge Church, which stands on the northern slope, very near the summit of the ridge ; and a third break, with a flat of about 100 paces, separates the continuation of that height from another, occupied by a small wood belonging to Brasted Place, and called by the inhabitants the “New World”: and here the top of the curve is visible in several places, from one of which this sketch was taken. The cracks in the principal bed here represented, (which is about nine- inches thick,) are wide and irregular; but the stone has every appearance of having been once continuous.
The bending of the strata is also very well disclosed in the grounds of Brasted Place itself, at the opposite side of the lane by which they are separated from the little wood of the “New World.” The curve is there less rapid than in the wood ; and the thickest bed of stone, marked A, is traversed by cracks from a quarter to half an inch in width, the separated portions being somewhat displaced, as if they had been forced out of continuity.
(43.) A continuation of the ridge above described may be traced westward from Brasted Place, for about four miles; and on the roadside ascending to the Chart near Moorhouse, about midway between Westerham and Lympsfield, beds are exposed, which dip rapidly to the north ; obviously forming a portion of a saddle, like that of Dry Hill, and, to all appearance, a prolongation of it.
From what I have seen in other parts of this country, I have little doubt that many of the ridges within the tract occupied by the lower green-sand may be ascribed to similar disturbances of the strata. A slight indication of something of this kind near Folkstone has been already referred to (32.). On the Ordnance map a prominent range is represented as running nearly north-west and south-east, from the village of Seal, through Seal Chart, to the heights above Stone Street on the south of Ightham Common. This, if not very much exaggerated, is probably a derangement like those just mentioned. The greater ridge of the Hog’s-back itself, on the west of Guildford in Surrey, of which the direction is nearly continuous with that of the ridge at Brasted, may be also connected with it; since the line of the Hog’s-back, if prolonged eastward, would pass through the high range of sand hills between Sbalford and Martha’s Chapel, and thence almost directly through Park Hill, Cockham Hill, and Tilburstow Hill, which last-mentioned place is the seat of a similar disturbance. The distance from Tilburstow to the inclined strata at Moorhouse, is not much more than four miles, and the whole course of this elevated line is almost uniformly from east to west; the line from Moorhouse to Montreal, through Sundridge, deviating from that direction only a few degrees to the north. Mr. Martin has described similar cases of much greater prominence and interest in Western Sussex*.
(44.) The abrupt rise of the beds in many of these ridges, and the speedy return of the ground to its general inclination, imply the action of a force which, if direct, must have been very near the surface, and too much circumscribed to be reconcilable either with the effect of gaseous expansion or the impulse of mineral matter in a state of fluidity. The space between the north and south chalk downs seems, in fact, to have been elevated, not by the mere protrusion of one central ridge, but to have been broken up in several different places, so that large portions were thrust outwards, or bent into ridges, by a lateral push, as when a cloth is wrinkled on a table; a mode of accounting for the formation of such inequalities of the surface, which seems more probable than the action of any direct violence from beneath.
SURREY.
(45.) Godstone.—The upper green-sand assumes a new character near Godstone; and a step-like projection at the foot of the chalk appears there more distinctly than in the country to the east. As the productions of the little district between Godstone and Reigate are valuable in commerce, and its structure has been a subject of some doubt, I have given a separate map of it, in Plate VII. fig. 2. The section, Plate X. a., No. 2., on the line from the chalk through Godstone, shows the position of the firestone beds in the upper green-sand; with the site of a remarkable elevation of the strata at Tilburstow Hill, an account of which has been already published by Mr. Mantellf: and No. 3., the section through Merstham, includes the site of the Fuller’s-earth pits of Nutfield.
(46.) The firestone subordinate to the upper green-sand, in this part of the country, was, in 1827, extracted only between Godstone and the west of Reigate. The principal pits were situated on the west of the London road to the former place. The stone was obtained by an adit between five and six feet in height, and the succession of the beds affording it was thus :
       (47.) The gault hereabouts occupies a tract which bears the name of   Blackland and forms a slight depression below the band which affords the firestone.
(48.) The lower green-sand has distinct indications of a subdivision into three, like that of the vicinity of Folkstone (16.). On the line of section, No. 2. Plates VII. and X. ponds are frequent, in a situation corresponding to that of the greener middle group (24.); the surface being comparatively low, with vegetation of a somewhat different character. The stony beds of the lowest group then rise to form the escarpment of Tilburstow Hill, which is nearly on a level with the chalk downs; and at the highest point, there is decisive evidence either of a sinking towards the chalk, or of elevation in an opposite direction; for at the top of the hill, the beds, which on the north of that place rise uniformly at an angle of not more than 10°, are suddenly thrown up to about 45°. The appearance of the section here is represented in the sketch subjoined. 
 (49.) Merstham.—The aspect of the amphitheatre formed by the outcrop of the chalk and upper green-sand around this village is very characteristic: a prominent ridge of the latter stratum, passing from Blackditches to the south of Gatton, in a nearly circular curve, above which the chalk downs rise, with a similar curvature (see Plates VII. fig. 2., and X. a. No. 3.). Merstham occupies nearly the middle of the line which has been worked upon for firestone; the extreme points to which the quarries have extended of late years being near Godstone on the east, and Buckland Green on the west. The village stands on the confines of the upper green-sand and the gault, a little to the south of an opening or gorge in the chalk, through which runs one of the principal roads from London to Brighton. The beds dip at a very small angle, towards the north ; and those which include the firestone are visible to a thickness of about thirty feet, projecting like a step beyond the foot of the chalk escarpment. The works had been discontinued for some time before I visited the place; but the following list of the strata was given to me by the person who had superintended them. 
(50.) The rise of the Lower green-sand is here very well defined; and the soil over the upper ferruginous beds of the formation is called “ hazel- mould’ in distinction from the “black-land” upon the gault. Immediately on the south of the ridge formed by this first member of the sands, a slight valley or depression, with a moist and more fertile surface, is occupied by cohesive sand of a dark greenish hue and softer texture, which corresponds to the middle group of Folkstone, above described, (16.) and (24.). The retentive quality of this latter stratum, which gives a somewhat marshy character to the tract in which it occurs, and the approach of its hue and texture to those of clay, have deceived even experienced geologists, and given rise to some mistakes respecting the lower strata of this neighbourhood. The section No. 3, I believe, expresses their true order and relations.
(51.) Fuller’s-earth has been dug in this part of Surrey, beyond the memory of the oldest inhabitant. At present the extraction is confined to the neighbourhood of Nutfield. The beds come up near the top of the lowest member of the green-sand, and occupy a line on the north side of a ridge, which extends from the east of Nutfield nearly to Redstone Hill, on the west of Copyhold Farm. About two miles west of Nutfield, nearly upon the ridge, was a pit, by which the earth was extracted from a stratum six to seven feet thick; and at Colmonger’s Farm another, of which the section was thus: 
(52.) Reigate.—The map and sections, Plate VII. fig. 2. and X a., Nos. 2. and 3., sufficiently indicate the general relations of the beds here, which have been already the subject of a paper in the Geological Transactions by Mr. Webster; where a sketch is given of the history of the remarkable ancient quarries at this place. The firestone forms a terrace beyond the chalk, nearly level with the top of the remotest sand-ridge; and the gault runs out from the base of the terrace, at first horizontally, and then rises towards the tunnel, by which the road is conducted through the first ridge of the Lower green-sandf, here composed of cream-coloured and yellowish sandrock. From the town of Reigate the strata rise again towards Cockham Hill: so that there are here two ridges ; first, that through which the tunnel is cut, and secondly, the southern ridge, formed of the lowest sand beds,—with what appears to be the middle, greener sand between. At Earlswood Common, about a mile to the east of the outcrop, the clay of the Wealds is found. The sudden fall from the chalk to the valley of Reigate and the abrupt rise thence to the outermost ridge of Red Hill, &c., is exceedingly striking. At Reigate Heath, on the west of the town, the vale which seems to be occupied by the middle sands is rushy and moist, bearing pools upon its surface: but the fall of the ground still farther west, where the continuation of the outer ridge of sands might be expected, is also a remarkable feature.
(53.) In proceeding westward, the rise of the sands at Buckland is likewise very rapid. Thence to Holmwood Common, on the south-west, no observations have been made, but the boundary between the green-sands and the Weald is less obviously marked ; and there is a strong contrast between this space and the prominent ridges of Leith Hill; the lower tract, it will be observed, being that in which the streams converge to join the Mole before its passage through the gorge at Dorking.
(54.) It will be seen, even from the map (Plate IX.), that the outcrop of the Lower green-sand, from Reigate to the head of the valley of the Wealds, is not continuous; two, if not three, distinct tracts of this formation, bounded pit was more in request; the price, however, the same. It is necessary for the purposes of the woollen manufacturer, that the Fuller’s-earth should be free from any admixture of ochre or sand, which are found to cut the cloth.
The relations of a stratum of dark greenish sandy clay, about seven feet thick, immediately above the tunnel at Reigate, are at first sight doubtful. It might be taken for an advanced portion of the gault; but is, more probably, a subordinate bed within the first division of the Lower green-sand ;—a detached portion, as it were, of the middle greener beds, which it resembles in mineral character. A similar bed occurs, in a corresponding situation at Pnlborough, which Mr. Martin, with whom I examined it, has since ascertained to belong to the place here mentioned.
1.—The first of these tracts of sand lies between Leith Hill and the opening cut across the sands towards Guildford, by the south-eastern branch of the Weyf, in which the Surrey and Sussex canal has been dug. Its southern verge extends from Leith Hill, through Holdenbury Hill, to Bearland and Stroud-Green, with a mean breadth from the chalk of about 3-f miles. 2.— The next step projects about 3 miles further south, with an average breadth of about 6 miles ; and its escarpment is nearly parallel to the Hog’s-back throughout the greater part of its length, from the Telegraph Hill, south of Hascomhe, to Emily Farm, a little east of the centre of a line from Hindhead toThursley. The anticlinal line, hereafter mentioned, along the top of Grayshot Down, may perhaps be the continuation of a ridge, or saddle, of which the beds rising towards Hascomhe are the remaining northern portion, the southern slope having been carried away by denudation. 3.—The sands on the north of the valley between Ludgershall and Harting-combe, may possibly be considered as a third step in these parallel outcrops, though much less regular than the two just mentioned : the lofty summit of Blackdown, at its eastern extremity, is standing out like a promontory, about two miles beyond the other parts of the escarpment on the south of Hindhead. It is impossible not to connect these appearances with the general action of the force by which the whole of this country has been upheaved; all the features coinciding with the hypothesis of its elevation on a line or lines parallel to the axis of the forest ridge.
(55.) Dorking to Leith Hill, &;c.—The tract between Leith Hill and Guildford affords nothing particularly deserving of notice, except the great height (993 feet) to which the outcrop of the lower green-sand rises, at the point on which the tower is placed. The space included between the escarpment and the downs from Dorking to Guildford is of nearly uniform character : but in approaching the latter place, the Lower green-sand rises with such rapidity, that Martha’s Chapel equals or out-tops the chalk, though less than a mile distant from it horizontally. Slighter indications, also, of disturbance are evident throughout this tract. The lower marly chalk at Deerleap above Wotton is divided by smooth surfaces, produced by the sliding of large masses upon each other: and where the road rises from the mill towards Abinger Church, at a point which corresponds with a continuation of the ridge above mentioned, near Brastead and Sundridge, the beds are curved, so as clearly to indicate derangement.
(56.) The road west of Dorking, between Westgate Heath and the Rookery, is cut through the first beds of the Lower green-sand, the top of which is eroded into irregular cavities, resembling those which are found, through, out the south-east of England, on the surface of the chalk; and, like them, filled with reddish loam and fragments of chalk flints. This being one of many indications, on the margin of the great Wealden valley, that the agents, whatever they were, by which the chalk was excavated, acted in the same manner on the beds beneath it, and filled up the cavities with similar materials, at least as far down as the Lower green-sand.
The lower strata of the quarries near Cold Harbour, immediately under the tower at Leith Hill, are almost identical with those of Tilburstovv, (p. 139); consisting of very green sand and soft sandrock, which alternate with chert, and include green matter, with white, vermicular or stem-like bodies, as at that place.
(57.) Guildford, Godaiming, Farnham, Hindhead.—The tract on the south and west of Guildford, and thence to Hindhead, forms one of the most extensive surfaces of the Lower green-sand to be found in England ; and the section from the heights on the north-west of Farnham to the Weald, (Plate X a., No. 4.) includes a succession of strata, from the Bagshot sands, one of the highest members of the English series, down to the Weald clay.
The quarries on the roadside between Guildford and Shalford, disclose a good section of the chalk, with numerous flints, dipping at an angle of about 5° or 6°, a little to the west of north ; and on the opposite side of the Wey, beneath St. Catherine’s Hill, the relative position of the lower strata is very well displayed.
(58.) The Hog’s-back.—The remarkable ridge called the Hog’s-back,” which runs from Guildford to a point about two miles from Farnham, has been produced evidently by an upthrow of the chalk, and the breaking off of the southern portion of the curve. The inclined position of the remaining side of the flexure is very well seen at the western extremity of a large chalk-pit between Guildford and Puttenham, where the strata dip towards the north, at an angle of about 30°. The upper beds are very white, with courses of the usual dark flint nodules ; and a remarkable feature in this quarry, is the distinctness with which the chalk is divided into masses approaching to a rhomboidal figure, by seams oblique to the stratification ; the angles of the portions thus bounded, standing out in the face of the cliff, like splinters in the shattered fracture of a crystal.
 (59.) The genera] thickness of Lower green-sand here seems to be nearly the same with that of the coast, and may be taken as between 350 and 400- feet ; though, from its superficial extent, a much greater thickness might be ascribed to it, if the disturbance and inflexion which it has undergone were not kept in view. There can be no doubt, both from the features of the surface, and the hue and texture of the strata, that the subdivision into three, which is conspicuous near Folkstone, and not much less distinct in Western Sussex, exists also in this tract. But the precise boundaries of these groups are by no means obvious, for there are not hereabouts those characteristic beds of stone, which are found near the coast; their place being supplied, in the uppermost group, by concretions of a coarse conglomerate, which in the country bears the name of "Bargate Stone;” and, in the lowest group, by chert and indurated sandrock, like those of Leith and Tilburstow hills. This comparative scarcity of calcareous matter is one of the principal differences between the eastern and western tracts of this formation.
The more ferruginous concretions, (the “carstone” of Norfolk,) which are very abundant in the upper part of the Lower green-sand of this neighbourhood, are often so compact as to ring under the hammer, and are thence called “ clinkers ” by the quarrymen; sometimes forming plates or flakes, a quarter of an inch and upwards in thickness, and curved so as to resemble portions of concentric layers of petrified trees. This stone furnishes an excellent material for the roads, and gives a remarkable reddish hue to some of those which are macadamised in this country. Fragments of brown hematite also, like those of the Red-cliff near Culver in the Isle of Wight, are found at many places in this vicinity; as at Thursley, &c.
(60.) Godabning.—The heights about Godaiming afford excellent sections, which may with some probability be assigned to the lowest part of the Green-sand formation. The order in general was thus :—
Among the looser sandy materials of Holloway-hill are spongy concretions, which show, when moist, the same vermicular structure as at Tilburstow-hill.	
Blackheath, south-east of Guildford, seems to have been once a continuation of the sands near Godalmin". Its top is nearly level with the chalk range, but lower than Martha’s Chapel hill. On the south, the ground descends to Farley Heath, with a sort of escarpment like that of Crooks- bury and Farnham commons, hereafter mentioned ; and the road thence by Farley-green to Hound-house is in a richer sand, supporting pools in several places, and probably belonging to the middle group.
Crooksbury Common seems to consist of the upper members of the formation, impending, like an outcrop 150 to 200 feet thick, over the valley of the Wey, between Elstead and Tilford; and on the south of the stream the heights of sand are renewed. Farnham Common is analogous to that of Crooksbury, and apparently a continuation of the same plateau, deeply cut through by one of the principal streams of the Wey. On the south of these, is the lower tract of Frensham and Thursley commons, and thence the ground rises rapidly towards Hindhead, the ascent consisting of sand deeply trenched into channels. A conspicuous group of barren, somewhat conical hills, on the south of Frensham Common, called the “ Devil’s Jumps,” is apparently the remaining portion of a stratum of sand reduced by abrasion to the present irregular form ; and the pebbles and rolled masses on Thursley Common, immediately on the north of Hindhead, are sandrock, passing into chert, which seems to be unmixed with other matter, and to be the debris of the beds now removed.
(61.) Hindhead.—The crest of Hindhead is on the north-east of a depression called the "Devil’s Punchbowl/’ round which the road is conducted. The highest part of the curve, or anticlinal bending, of the Lower greensand, seems to be just at a point where the new road, on a lower level than the old, has exposed a face of 10 to 25 feet in height. The flexure is very slight, but sufficiently perceptible, occurring in such a place, to be deserving of notice. The strata consist of soft sandrock, containing concretions, and nearly continuous beds of chert, passing into chalcedony, of various shades of yellow and brown ; with occasional layers of bright yellowish sand, in which the lines of false stratification are conspicuous. All over Grayshot Down the subsoil is a soft, loose sand of the same description.
(62.) The whole of the tract here occupied by the sands, though not unpicturesque, is wild and barren in its aspect, destitute of wood, producing only' ferns, heath, and furze. The surface is in fact, to this hour, nearly such as it may be conceived to have been when first uncovered by the departure of the sea; and its structure is just what may be imagiried to result from the levelling effect of water under the influence of motion of no great violence. In crossing this desolate region by the main road from London to Portsmouth, it is difficult to believe that we are only forty miles distant from the capital, and midway to one of the chief naval establishments of the empire : but the nature of the soil effectually prevents improvement, and it is not improbable that this tract may remain for centuries unchanged, and still exemplify the power of geological causes in modifying the civil condition of countries, as well as their external features.
In the bottom of the “ Punch Bowl,” perhaps 200 feet beneath the road, a small stream arises, and the north flank of the highest ridge of Hindhead, which runs nearly west from the summit, is furrowed by nine or ten similar and nearly parallel trenches: the deepest of these is called Hack- ham Bottom, the stream from which is continued along the verge of Thursley Common to the Wey at Elstead. The ridge represented in the section No. 4. is that of Grayshot Down, as it appears from the lower ground on the north. It declines westward to Harem, and also to the south ; so that there is here distinctly an anticlinal line, more than three miles north of the central valley of the Weald between Ludgershall and Harting-comtye.
(63.) Although Hindhead is the most prominent point in this part of the country, it is not, strictly speaking, the escarpment of the Lower green-sand ; for the strata, which rise very gradually on the west of the denudation, run out to the east beyond the highest summit, and caps of sand are preserved on some of the advanced ridges and in several detached points. For the same reason, Blackdown Hill, about four miles south of Hindhead, is no more than a massive cap of sand, resting with a very slight inclination upon the Weald clay : and all the deep ravines which separate the heights and ridges on the west and north-west of Blackdown, towards Lynchmere and Haslemere, have sand only at top ; the clay rising here to not much less than six hundred feet above the sea. Blackdown forms the north-eastern promontory of what may be called the central valley of the denudation; the opposite and converging side of which is a similar escarpment of the Lower green-sand, extending from Harting-combe to Bexley-hill. The floor of the narrow intermediate space consists of the Weald clay, which, close to the junction, abounds in Cypris Faba; and where the valley opens into the wider expanse of the Wealds, the first range of the Wealden sand and sandrock, described by Mr. Martin, about 25 feet thick, and at a vertical distance of about 200 feet from the top of the clay, forms a sort of bar, or elevated ridge, across the entrance; occupying an extensive surface between Ludgershall upon the Lod, and Northhurst, and being thence continued, at a corresponding distance from the top of the clay, all round the denudation. The course of the Lower green-sands on the south and south-west of this valley having been pointed out by Mr. Murchison, it is unnecessary to pursue this description farther.
(64.) Weald Clay.—The lowest beds of the tract near Guildford have recently been exposed in a pit for the extraction of gravel at Pease-marsh, an extensive flat on both sides of the London road, between Arlington, south of Guildford, and Godaiming. On examining the place, to which my attention was called by Mr. Murchison, I found beneath a thickness of four or five feet of flint gravel and sand, distinct strata of blue clay, nearly horizontal, though with an irregular surface, including flat nodular concretions of iron pyrites, also horizontally disposed. No fossils were visible; but from the situation and characters of the clay, it seemed most probably to be that of the Weald, brought up into this close proximity to the chalk, by the general elevation of all the strata. It is indeed probable that the Weald clay is very near the surface in many other places; but as the middle group of the sands is also retentive of water, and capable of sustaining ponds, the distinction can be ascertained only by attention to local circumstances. The difference of level is so small in the different portions of the Wey, from Pease-marsh, by Godaiming, Pepperharrow, Elstead, and Tilford, that this clay may be the base of the stream throughout; but many of the ponds which occur at higher levels, in the tract between Dorking and West Sussex, may safely be referred to the middle group of the sands.
(65.) Tucksbury-hillf, —The summit of this hill, which forms the northern extremity of the section, Plate X. a. No. 4. is an outlier composed of siliceous and ferruginous sand, upon the surface of which are numerous angular fragments of pale yellowish flint. The ground descends from it on all sides, but with the greatest rapidity towards the valley of the Wey ; and it affords an excellent view, both of the successive outcrop of the strata in the lower country, on the south-east, and (especially) of the tract on the north, occupied by the Bagshot sands to which the cap of the hill seems to belong; the flat-topped ranges and the lower barren tracts of that formation being seen from hence very distinctly. The summits of Romping-down and Chobham-ridge project above the surrounding country, with escarpments towards the east, nearly at right angles to the range of the Chalk Downs; but the general rise of the sands is towards the south, conformably to that of the chalk. The succession of strata observable in descending from the elevation to the valley of the Wealds, is very instructive.
At the west end of the hill, beneath Warren’s-corner, on the road to Basingstoke, Septaria are found in a stratum of the London clay, which occupies a considerable thickness on the slope of the hill, below the cap of sand. I was informed that “ Pot-earth,” of a different quality, occurs lower down, in Clarehouse-Park, in the situation of the Plastic clay; and I have seen the Chalk in the decline of the hill, between Lower Old Park and Halfway-house.
The Upper green-sand forms a slight prominence beneath this chalk, on the south of Dip penhall-house, between the words ‘ Dean’s-farm ’ and ‘ Ridgway ’ on the Ordnance map, the strata dipping not much more than 5° to the north. The rock, which is there called ‘Marl-stone,’ does not precisely agree with any I have seen between this place and the coast, but is very like some of the strata in the corresponding place at East Knoyle, on the north of the Vale of Wardour. It is a subcalcareous sandstone, or variety of “ fire-stone,” very soft, uniform, of a yellowish-grey or cream-colour, scarcely effervescent, and remarkable for its lightness ; and it includes concretions of a hard splintery limestone, approaching to chert, and of much greater density than the stone which surrounds them.
The Gault, on the line of the section, first comes up on the road descending from Ridgway to the river Wey, but is more distinctly seen at the extremity of Wracklesham; and, in consequence of the more gradual rise of the strata, on the south-west of that village, it occupies a more expanded surface in Alice-Holt Wood, as described in Mr. Murchison's paper above referred to.
On the south of the main London road, where it is crossed by the road to Wracklesham, is a bank with the Lower green-sand at the bottom, rising towards the village. The surface is waved remarkably; and the inequalities are filled up with gravel, consisting of broken flint pebbles, in large proportion, mixed with red loam, and in immediate contact with the yellowish sands below. The top of the gravel, is nearly level; but its depth to the sand varies from to 4 feet. This fact is analogous to the erosion of the sands near Dorking, mentioned above (56).
(66.) The mode in which the drainage of the north-western portion of the great valley of the Wealden is effected, and the different manner in which the streams escape, in this part of the country, from that of their egress through the North and South Downs, support the hypothesis of Mr. Scrope and Mr. Martin, that the gorges themselves were not produced by simple denudation, but least prepared, by antecedent fissures cutting entirely across the Weald: while the appearances of the surface, above described, are so unlike those which would have been produced by rapid diluvial action, as to indicate either a long period of submersion, at no great depth, or very gradual drainage and long-continued decay.
The principal branch of the Wey, from its rise near Alton, to Farnham, is nearly straight, in a direction from south-west to .north-east; but immediately below Farnham, instead of cutting across the chalk downs, it turns abruptly to the south-east, to join another branch; which likewise runs in a straight line nearly parallel to the former, from its source in the chalk near Selborne, through Kingsley, by Frensham, to Tilford Bridge, where the streams unite: and then taking a tortuous course, but in a general direction parallel to the Hog’s-back, the river cuts deep through the platform of the sands, on the north and west of Godaiming, receiving several streamlets by the way. But there, instead of continuing its direction, it turns suddenly to the north; and receiving another branch from beyond Cranley, far within the valley of the Wealds, cuts almost directly across both the green-sand and the chalk, and makes its way to the Thames at Weybridge. The mere closing-up of the defile at the mills on the north of Godaiming, would convert the whole of Pease-marsh, Frensham, and Thursley commons into a lake:—and, on the other hand, a slight excavation towards the north, through Frensham to the river, would drain the great pond there.
The sudden change in the direction of the Wey, near Farnham, is the more remarkable, as the Blackwater, which rises on the northern slope of the chalk downs between Farnham and Aider- shot, about two miles from the angle of the Wey near the west end of the Hog’s-back, runs on the Bagshot sands, towards the north and west, by Frimley, Blackwater, &c., to join the Lodden, not far north of Strathfieldsay, in its course to the Thames near Shiplake. The line of the Wey, therefore, from Alton to Farnham, is nearly a continuation of that of the Blackwater; the two streams being separated only by the prominence of the chalk between the Hog’s-back and the foot of Tucksbury Hillf.
The gorge of the Wey is nearly opposite to that of the Arun, on the south of the Wealden, one branch of which runs almost directly north and south, from a point between Boxwood and Slinfold, to the sea at Little Hampton; and the structure of the two rivers is very much alike. The Arun rises in the centre of the Wealden tract, whence it runs directly to the sea; as does the Wey from Cranley : but it receives, near Pulborough, at right angles to the main stream, the copious branch (if it be not rather itself the principal stream,) called the Rother; which, having risen near the ponds of Wolmer Forest, very near the sources of the Wey, and followed the curves of the denudation for more than twenty miles, in the trough between the chalk escarpment and the Lower green-sand, is then carried suddenly out of that direction, and withdrawn from the valley of the Weald.
(67.) From whatever cause the transverse course of the streams may have originated, the relative composition of the strata was favourable to their retaining that direction, when once they had made their way across the chalk and Upper green-sand. For, as the lower beds of the chalk itself, and still more the Gault, are remarkably retentive, while the upper chalk is permeable by water,—the slope of all the strata being outwards, or from the central ridge of the valley, the whole of the waters imbibed by the chalk would be determined outwards, if any pervious channel were opened at its bottom. And if a fissure were cut through the whole series, without great vertical displacement, the retentive beds of the chalk-marl and clay, would immediately reunite, and close it below; while, the chasm in the chalk above remaining open, a permanent drainage outwards would be produced, and the break would be continually enlarged.
(68.) The following is a list of some of the fossils obtained from the strata above the Weald clay, within the portions of Kent and Surrey mentioned in the preceding sections:—
A fragment of a very large Ammonite (or Hamite?), was found by one of my sons (W. I. F.), among the lowest beds of the green-sand on the south of Brasted in Kent; which, when complete, must have formed a spiral between two and three feet in diameter. The separate convolutions are about nine inches in breadth; and the flutings of the surface, which are simple, are about two inches across the broadest part, and in depth about an inch. The specimen belongs, not improbably, to one of the large species which occur in the Gault of Yorkshire, (see Phillips).
Hampshire and Western Sussex.
The south-western portion of the Wealden denudation has been so fully described by Mr. Murchison and Mr. Martin, that I shall refer to their publications already quoted, for an account of it; giving- here only some additional facts with which I have been favoured by those two gentlemen : and for a similar reason I shall leave untouched the territory of Mr. Manteli in Western Sussex.
(69.) Hampshire.—Accumulations of broken chalk flints have been found very extensively,over the surface of the Lower green-sand, on the newroad from Petersfield to MidhurstinWest Sussex; at Sheet Hill; and several other places in this part of Hampshire. In the former situation, which is about three miles from the nearest chalk, the detritus covers an uneven .surface of the sand, which appears to have been acted upon precisely in the same manner as that of the chalk itself; the sand being eroded into irregular cavities, sometimes almost tubular, which are now occupied by chalk flints, a great part of them in small fragments, and all of a rusty yellow colour. Equally abundant accumulations of these are seen also on the hills of white sand (one of the upper members of the Lower green), atStedham and Trotton commons, between six and seven miles east of Petersfield ; but in this case the flints are not discoloured. This latter place is distant nearly three miles from the nearest point of the chalk, and between nine and ten miles east of that where the chalk escarpments are confluent. In the angle of the chalk west and northwest of Petersfield, particularly in the ascent to Alton by Stoner Hill, such heaps are yet more common. These facts coincide with the observations already mentioned, near Boughton, Dorking, and Wracklesham (38, 56, and 65) ; so that it would seem as if chalk flint gravel above the LowTer greensand was of general and frequent occurrence all around the denudation. Mr. Murchison, however, adds, that he has still no knowledge of any such debris beyond the limits of that formation, or within the Wealden properly so called.
(70.) The stiff and retentive marly beds, at the base of the Downs, sustaining the water which descends through the chalk, have produced a line of ponds along the bottom of the escarpment of the South Downs;—a result precisely analogous to the breaking-out of the springs above the marl, at Lydden Spout, upon the coast (8.), and all along the base of the Downs on the north.
(71.) One of the chief characteristics of the tract near Petersfield, consists in the great relative extent and prominence of the Upper green-sand; which runs out beyond the foot of the chalk escarpment, like a step or terrace, throughout the tract from Farnham, by Selborne and Petersfield, to the south of Petworth, and affords some of the best sections anywhere to be found, except perhaps in the Isle of Wight. Though in the parishes of Buriton, Harting, &c., there is an insensible passage from the grey chalk and chalk marl, into the Upper green-sand, still the whole of the terraces (there at least two miles broad) are exclusively composed of what is called in the country Malm-rock. The grey or lower chalk of this portion of the South Downs is charged with the Inoceramus mytiloidcs, I. Cnvieri, Brongniarti, and two species of small plicated Terebratula, and does not contain any of the characteristic malm-rock fossils enumerated in Mr. Murchison’s memoir ; nor does the malm-rock contain, so far as his observation goes, a single specimen of the genera Inoceramus and Terebratula, so abundant in the overlying chalk : a fact which is the more deserving of attention, as several other genera and species are found both in the Upper green-sand and the Lower chalk.
(72.) Vicinity of Pulborough.—I am indebted to Mr. Martin for the section (Plate X a. No. 5.) across the Wealden district, from Duncton Deacon on the South Downs, through Petwortli, to Cranley; and I have, from my own observations, continued it in the same direction to the North Downs. This section shows, what Mr. Martin’s recent observations have fully confirmed, that the subdivisions of the sands below the chalk, in the north-west of Sussex, correspond with those above described, in the neighbourhood ofFolkstone; and that a similar valley distinctly marks, in both cases, the place of the middle greener and retentive sands, (24.). I have had myself also an opportunity of seeing, with Mr. Martin, a section parallel to that of Plate X a., in which this structure is very clearly displayed, on a line about half a mile west of Pul- borough, passing through the heights of Park-hill farm and Pethenden (with the valley of the middle sands between), to a detached summit within the Weald-clay, called Pickhurst Hill; (See Plate X b. fig. 2.). Fuller’s-earth like that of Nutfield, appears at Fittleworth Church, near Pulborough.
Besides the mass of this intermediate group, a detached stratum, about 40 feet in thickness, of dark-coloured, greenish grey, retentive sand, including much pyritous matter, occurs above it, with some feet of ferruginous and yellowish sand between;—a subordinate bed, in fact, within the upper ferruginous mass of the sand : and this ought to be held in view, as in some cases it might be mistaken for the Gault. It is very conspicuous on the ascent of the London road, from the flats on the south, to the church at Pulborough ; and can be traced thence, almost continuously, for some miles both to the east and west. No fossils have been found in this stratum, except some impressions of what may be the branches of fuci. A bed of dark hue, with the same characters, seems to occupy a corresponding place in the series near Reigate : See note f on (52.).
(73.) This country has been the scene of several upheavings and derangements of the strata, analogous to those above mentioned in West Kent (41. to 43.), but much more complex and extensive. Some of these have been described in Mr. Martin’s work already referred to; and of others, more recently observed by that gentleman, I hope he will himself soon publish a description.

(74.) The junction of the sands and clay,at Stopham brick-yard, on the west of Harwood’s Green, near Pulborough, affords the only indications that have come to my knowledge, of any interruption or disturbance between the deposition of the upper part of the Weald clay, and of the incumbent Lower green-sand. The surface of the clay at the place in question is hollowed into irregular roundish cavities, at the bottom of which portions of green-sand were found, including several of the characteristic fossils of that formation ; while the clay, immediately below, is equally characterized by the presence of Cypris. At the junction, the clay was mixed with sand; and specimens of Panopcea plicata were found even two or three feet within nearly pure clay, along with ferruginous concretions, containing fossils of the Wealden, impressions of Cyclas, Cypris, and remains of fishes : and this mixture was observable to the depth of several feet;—so that both the sand and clay must have been at the time of mixture in a state of softness; or the sand must have been introduced over a surface of argillaceous mud, before it had consolidated. When 1 had the pleasure of examining the place, with Mr. Martin, the circumstances were unfavourable to observation : and, as the junction of the two formations here, is on the slope of a hill, it might have been doubted whether the appearances could not be explained by the effects of subsidence producing intermixture, during very rainy weather, or under water, before any of the strata had emerged. Mr. Martin, however, who had seen the place when the phenomena were better exhibited, is of opinion that this explanation of them would not have sufficed. In this brick-yard, the loamy sand found near the junction is used «Zone for making the bricks; sand being required in the manufacture, only for sprinkling the moulds.
(75.) List of Fossils from the Beds below the Chalk, in part of Hampshire and Western Sussex.
The following List of Fossils from the Upper green-sand in the vicinity of Petersfield, in addition to those mentioned in Mr. Murchison’s paper on that district, (Geol. Trans. 2nd Series, vol. ii. p. 99.) I owe to the kindness of Mrs. Murchison, in whose collection the specimens are placed. 
The Wealden.
(76.) In adopting this general denomination, proposed by Mr. Martin, for the formations below the green-sand, in the Wealds of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, I have extended its acceptation to the Purbeck strata also, which do not occur within those counties; because the whole group abounds in fossils of the same character. And though the Purbeck strata consist principally of limestone, which has many indications of lacustrine origin, they include, like the upper members of the Wealden, distinct alternations of marine fossils with those of freshwater :—one very thick bed especially, which consists almost entirely of oysters, showing that the sea must have had access to the waters from which they were deposited. Mr. Martin has ascertained that the Wealden strata above the Purbeck, consist, throughout, of alternations of sand, sand-rock, and grit, with clay and marl; so that the separation of the Weald-clay from the Hastings sands, is in a great measure arbitrary. But as in the only tracts where this group hasyetbeen observed, the sands rise above the valley of the clay, into a very prominent ridge, which forms a striking feature of the surface, this subdivision is to a certain extent natural, and may be retained with advantage.
(77.) Valley of the fVealds.—The beds of sand, sand-rock, and limestone subordinate to the Weald clay, have been traced by Mr. Martin throughout the tract represented in his map of Western Sussex, and I refer to his memoir for an account of them : their place is indicated in the Section, PI. X. a. fig. 5. I have myself observed beds of the same description,—no doubt continuous with those described by Mr. Martin, though I have not traced their continuity, on the opposite side of the Wealden and of the forest ridge, about Ewhurst, and on the east of that village. And in the course of the valley eastward, through Surrey and Kent, distinct and almost continuous ridges, apparently produced by the greater durability and prominence of similar strata, are observable from the escarpment of the sands, and are in part expressed in the Ordnance Maps.
Two, if not three lines of these subordinate strata cross the road which descends from the escarpment of the sands through Ewhurst. The first is at the foot of a height, which runs from the south of Coneyhurst Farm, through Woodland ; the beds consisting of limestone, (Sussex marble) full of large Paludinae and Cypris. A group, possibly a continuation of this, occurs in Mr. Turner’s grounds, north of Forest Green, at Atherley, about two miles east of Woodland, below Leith-hill Place; but there the stone is greenish micaceous grit, in three contiguous courses, each about 12 inches thick, containing very large Paludinae, Uniones, and stemlike concretions, where the stone adjoins the whitish sand, on which it rests. Above Henhouse Farm also, about a mile and a half east of Atherley, a range of high ground indicates the presence of firm bands of stone; and grit is found there, which includes similar Uniones, and a few Paludinae.
A second band, composed of ironshot sand, over variegated reddish brown clay, crosses the road, at the church of Ewhurst, passing thence eastward through Lyefield Farm. The stone-pits of Forest Green seem to be on this line, but they consist of beds of grit including Uniones and Cypris, above yellowish sand, reddish clay, and concretional sandstone, with casts of Uniones.
At Bowles’s Farm, on the east of Cranley, is a bed of very compact sand-stone, apparently lower in the series than those above mentioned: and the roads hereabouts are repaired with grit from Newhouse, between Cranley and Ewhurst. Stone is also found nearly on the same line eastward, at Redford and Standling; and again on the south of Capel (on the road from Dorking, about a furlong north of the 30th mile-stone), is a prominent ridge, with a course of sand, in beds from 2 to 6 inches thick, in light-coloured clay.
The height last mentioned, near Capel, may probably be the continuation of a ridge which, on the Ordnance Map, begins about 34- miles to the east of that place, passing from Stand-hill, through Norwood and Horse-hill; and which (being resumed on the east of the Mole), forms a range nearly parallel to the escarpment of the Lower green-sand,—by Lady-farm, about two miles south of Earlswood-common on the road from Reigate to Brighton, Outwood-common, Lostland, south of Gayhouse-farm, and thence, through Hook-stile, to the stream south of Comfort’s-Place farm, and Moat farm. On the east of the place last mentioned, the ridges between the Lower green sand and the Hastings sand, are not so well defined; but on the south of Boughton, a series of heights extends from Harden to the east of Staplehurst.
(78.) Coast of Kent. There is, strictly speaking, no section of the Weald clay and the upper part of the Hasting sands on the coast of Kent; the line of heights which, at some very remote period, may have been sea-cliffs washed by the English Channel, being now covered with vegetation, and separated from the sea by the wide tract of Romney Marshes. Having, myself, some years ago, observed indications of sand and stone, in the Weald valley near the coast where it is difficult to find good sections exposed, my friend the Rev. G. E. Smith was good enough, at my request, to examine that part of the country ; and from his notes I learn that the greater part of the series there must consist of sand and sandy clay,—the blue fissile clay, which occurs in the upper part of it, not recurring, or not having been detected, farther down.
The first rise of the clay from beneath the green-sands, is represented in the view Plate VIII.; and the general section of the coast between Folkstone and Beachy Head, (Plate X. a. No. 6.) includes the strata on the west of Hythe. The shore beneath that town, which is sometimes laid bare, when the sea carries away the shingles, during the prevalence of easterly winds, consists of soft bluish clay, which has the characters of river mud, and differs much from the uniform slaty clay of the Wealds. But the latter has been cut through in sinking wells above the main street of Hythe, which, in some instances, have gone to the depth of 75 feet entirely in clay. In one of these wells, the succession of beds was thus ;—beginning at a point about 60 feet beneath the bottom of the Lower green-sand.
Upper Part of the Weald-Clay at Hythe.
Blue clay with Cypris occurs also, according to the Rev. G. E. Smith, immediately below the green-sand, at Aldington Corner ; but nothing like it, he informs me, in the succeeding parts of the section towards the south. A bed of limestone, with Paludinas (“ Sussex marble”) occurs at Hursty, beneath Court-at-Street, and seems to be continued in the clay which passes from that place round the base of Aldington Knoll; and a similar stone is found, in a corresponding situation in the cypriferous clay, at Daniell’s Water on the south-west, Stanford Bridge, on the west of Ashford, and near Bethersden, about 22 miles south of Stanford Bridge. A continuous range of slightly elevated ground, extending from Lovelace near Bethersden towards Shadoxhurst (in a direction parallel to that of the other ridges of this country, and to the range of the chalk escarpment), may also indicate the existence of some stratum of greater firmness than the clay.
Mr. Smith mentions two subordinate courses of sand, with sand-rock, sandy clay and loam, as occurring in the lower tract, or valley of the Weald, between Aldington Corner and the cliffs of sand and grit on the north of Rye. (1.) The first of these runs from near Bilsington, through Orleston ; with which line a range in the interior seems, from the map, to be continuous, for about four miles more towards the north-west,—through Woodchurch Beacon and Redbrook Street. It seems to be parallel to the ridge above mentioned between Bethersden and Shadoxhurst; and sections of the strata are disclosed at Bilsington Priory; on the roads from Bilsington Cross to High-house; from Ruckinge to Ham Street, and from Ham Street to Orleston; and perhaps near Warehorn Leaton. (2.) The second course, rvhich consists of red clay with sand and sand-rock, begins at Brookarm, on the verge of the marshes, and passes through Bench-hill. On the south of this last-mentioned range, sand and sandy clay appear to abound: concretional beds of hard vations of so much interest, that, but for the immediate object of these pages, I should willingly have inserted them in full.
 (79.) Hastings Sands.—Mr. Webster has described and given a drawing of the cliffs on the east of Hastings, in a preceding volume of these Transactions; and a general section of the coast between the chalk downs of Kent and Sussex will be found in the annexed Plate, X. a. No. 6.f I shall not, therefore, here detail the stratification of this portion of the Wealden, especially as lists of the strata will be given hereafter, in describing the coast of the Isle of Wight and of Dorsetshire ; but shall confine myself to an account of the cliffs, on the west of those represented in Mr. Webster’s Sectional View,—which were uncovered to a great extent during the progress of the buildings and improvements recently carried on between Hastings and St. Leonard’s.
(80.) Shore on the West of Hastings.—The anticlinal line of the ridge consisting of the Hastiugs-sands runs inland, from the shore towards a point about 60° west of north; beginning on the east of Hastings, about Lee Ness Point, and passing through Battle, and thence along a series of ridges, to its greatest height at Crowborough Beacon, on the south-west of Tonbridge Wells. The strike, on the west of Hastings, is not parallel to the anticlinal ridge, but oblique to it at an angle of about 44°, the strata running nearly from east to west, and dipping generally towards the south. The direction of the coast line for a short distance, at St. Leonard’s, coincides with the strike, but from Hastings to the entrance of that place, makes an angle with it of about 10°,—the line of the shore running from about 14° north of east, towards the south of west; and on the west of St. Leonard’s, the coast turns a little towards the north of west, and again makes a small angle with the strike. In going along the shore, therefore, from Hastings towards Bulverhithe, the strata first appear to be inclined to the south of west; then to become horizontal; and beyond St. Leonard’s, to rise a little from the sea,—the same beds recurring- there in a reversed order. The Section, Plate X. b, fig. 2, which is on a much larger scale than Plate X. a, No. 5, represents the cliffs here referred to, and will illustrate the structure above described.
(81.) The top of the great stratum of white and nearly pure sand, which forms the cliff under the castle at Hastings, comes down to the shore at the White Rock, and disappears under the sea on the west of it. A stratum which has many of the same characters, and seems to be a continuation of that of Hastings, rises at the bottom of the cliff, about 350 paces west of the church at St. Leonard’s ; all the beds in the intermediate space being consequently higher in the series. There is still some obscurity as to their relations, from the effects of disturbance; and some points are concealed : but the following list gives an approach to the order of their succession, descending,— with an estimate of the relative thickness of the groups, and the places in which they are found.
Supposed Groups of Strata on the Shore between Hastings and Galley Hill. 
(82.) The following details respecting the strata just enumerated may be worth preserving, as the surface of the cliffs will probably soon be concealed.
a.—The highest members of this series are partially exposed on the north of the back street, near the eastern buildings of the Marina and the archway at the entrance of St. Leonard’s; from whence down to the shore is a series of strata, which are horizontal on the line of the strike, but rise in reality towards the north, at an angle between 12° and 15°. The uppermost beds consist of soft grey sand-rock, with some intermixture of clay, and form a total thickness of about 66 feet above the road. The lower members are visible in the back street, and on the west of the houses are seen to rise towards the west. The horizontal portion occupies about 150 paces from west to east, and after that space, in consequence of a change in the direction of the shore towards Hastings, a rise towards the east begins to be apparent. The strata which connect this group with the beds of clay around the church hereafter mentioned (III. d.), have been carried away or are concealed.
b.—The group next below is partially seen on the shore between St. Leonard’s and the White Rock. Between the archway and the vacancy in the range of heights, which is called Warriors’ Gate, is a low cliff about 250 paces in length, and about 30 feet high, which has been cut away to admit of the erection of houses. It consists of sand-rock, alternating with clay or marl; the beds of which rise and disappear in succession, corresponding altogether to a total thickness of about 50 feet.
c.—The opening at Warriors’ Gate occupies a horizontal space of about 300 paces, and within it, on the north, is a bank of sand-rock like the strata last described. On the east of this opening, a low range of grass-covered cliffs, from 40 to about 60 feet in height, extends without interruption to the beginning of the road over the projecting masses at the White Rock; and two remarkable beds of greenish Fuller’s-earth, in general about two feet thick, but in some places much thicker, separated by about four feet of sand-rock, rise upon the road-side, and are continued steadily in the face of the cliff, nearly to the White Rock, being, near that place, more than 30 feet above the bluish clay (II. 9.) at the bottom. The base of the cliffs here is about 20 feet above a floor of rocks which is bare at low water, and consists of yellowish, firmly concreted sand, or sand-rock, abounding in granular (pisolitic) reddish oxide of iron*. This granulated rock forms, hereabouts, a ledge beneath high-water mark, dipping to the west of south, at an angle of about 11°, with a strike towards a point about 6° or 7° south of east.
—About 120 paces west of W’hite Rock, where the road formerly began to rise over that prominence, the cliff behind the new houses, about 40 feet high, consists of a large proportion of sand and sand-rock, with alternations of clay; and in some places contains so much lignite, in the form of indistinct fragments of stems and portions of branches, as to have a dark brown or blackish hue. A bed of light bluish clay (II. 9.) forms the lowest part of this cliff, and seems to be continued downwards ; it probably corresponds to the beginning of the series of beds of clay &c., (III. c.) near the church of St. Leonard’s.
On the shore at low water, about 150 paces west of the place last mentioned, is a group of beds which are curved, so that their dip is divergent, those on the east dipping towards the south, at an angle of about 10°; they consist of sand-rock, and may possibly be continuous with the sloping bed at the White Rock, shown in the section, and inferior to the bluish clay of II. 9. Other appearances indicate that this has been the scene of some derangement, so that the relations of the beds, above described, to those under the White Rock and on the west of it, are still doubtful: the wdiole series, however, is nearly conformable, and almost continuous with the rest of the strata towards St. Leonard’s.
On the east and south of the nook, in which is the light bluish clay, II. 9. a bed of brownish sand-rock about 10 feet thick, immediately adjoins the road, dipping to the south of west, at a much more rapid inclination (about 18°) than that of the adjacent strata. This bed, nevertheless, may be a continuation of those which form the curve represented above; and its present position may have been the result either of subsidence, which has caused it to fall away from the apparently continuous mass of strata within it on the north, or of some more extensive derangement of the coast at this place.
a.— White Rock Ledge. —The great ledge visible upon the shore at low water, to the solidity of which the prominence of the White Rock (so long as it remained) was to be ascribed, rises beneath the sea, about 200 paces to the east of the rock, and seems to be continued for a considerable distance in that direction. A series of conformable strata of sand-rock, concretional grit, and slaty clay, here occupies the whole space between high- and low-water mark, for more than 100 paces; with a strike to about 20° east of south, and dip to the west of south : and this remarkable group contains in some places pisolitic grains of reddish oxide of iron, disseminated in yellow sand-rock, like that which is found in tlie strata beneath.
HI, 	The beds in the upper part of the cliff behind the Brewery are a continuation of part of the croup upon the shore (III. a.), and, like it, contain great numbers of the singular fossil which has been called Endogenites erosa. They are probably the same with those of III. c. which rise on the shore under the Marina at St. Leonard’s, of which an extensive section was exposed in excavating the site of the church; and both groups are interesting, for their apparent identity with the Tilgate strata, which have furnished to Mr. Manteli an almost inexhaustible store of extraordinary fossil remains.
The foregoing divisions are evidently arbitrary. In a general view, this section may be said to consist of rather more than 50 feet of thinly stratified sand and clay, with grit in concretions; including, at the upper part, a stratum of darker colour, about 12 feet thick, near the middle of which the remains of Endogenites are found.
(83.) The rock composed of alternating' layers of sand, and darker sandy clay., No. 2. a. of the preceding list, constitutes a large proportion both of the Weald clay and the Hastings sands; and a similar alternation of sand and clay of different hues and consistency, extends upwards beyond the limits of the Wealden, into the Lower green-sand. When the masses of the rock are dry, the structure is less conspicuous, but it becomes beautifully apparent when they are moistened. The delicacy and distinctness of the folia which are then seen in the cross fracture of the beds, are very remarkable; the separate leaves being frequently as thin as paper, vet perfectly distinguishable, from their different alternating shades of greenish grey; and commonly continued with great regularity for considerable spaces ; a structure clearly indicating very tranquil deposition, such as might be expected in a fluid suspending solid matter divided to extreme minuteness, yet subject to frequent changes at nearly equal intervals; which may well be conceived to have taken place in the waters of a lake or estuary, at different seasons, or during different conditions of the waters,—if it be going too far in theory to suppose the minuter laminae to have been the produce of successive tides.
(84.) The continuity of the ledges of rock under the Marina at St. Leonard’s, with those of the shore under the White Rock, is rendered more probable by the occurrence of the Endogenites erosa in both. The principal ledge at the former place is very conspicuous on the shore at low water, and is one of the most remarkable geological features on the west of Hastingsf. The following are the beds of which it is composed:
These prominent ledges are precisely analogous to those which occur in the Hastings sands on the south coast of the Isle of Wight, where several reefs of rocks run out almost directly into the sea, and have obtained separate names from the inhabitants. On the Sussex coast they are less conspicuous, from the more rapid dip towards the sea, and the obliquity of the strike to the line of the coast; but many more such ledges do exist, between the flat near Pevensey and Cliff-end, about midway between Hastings and Winchelsea ;—see hereafter, (95.) 
Beds of the Group (III. c.) composing the Ledge on the Shore beneath St. Leonard's.
A thick and nearly continuous stratum, very like the stone of Hollington about ol miles north-west from Hastings; its structure, however, like that of the White rock, is distinctly concretional. The top of the concretions, when exposed and washed by the sea, exhibits beautifully the minute stratification of the original sand; and the globular masses on the underside project into the sand (2.) below. The stone is traversed nearly at right angles by veins of calcareous spar, and includes portions of trees, converted into lignite. It is associated also with patches of a looser conglomerate, consisting chiefly of rounded grains of whitish, nearly opake, quartz, including the teeth, scales, and bones of fishes, and of a species of Trionyx. The strike of this stratum is about 10° south of east, and the dip towards the west of south, at an angle of about 11°.
The following is an approximate list of the strata in the cliff on the west of the Sussex Hotel, between the bottom of the group last mentioned, and the White sand-rock IV.; corresponding therefore to the strata on the east of the White Rock, beneath the group, which contains the Endogenites. The measures exceed the truth, but the proportions are probably correct.
—In the space between the base of the cliff at the Brewery and the Castle-hill, all the beds have been carried away. But the great white sand bed IV. a. b. is itself visible at high-water mark immediately below the middle point of the White Rock; and thence to the place where the road to Hollington is cut through this stratum. From the Castle-hill, where it is at least 80 feet thick, it is continued with perfect uniformity of character to the top of Fairlight Down.


The white sand-rock above supposed to be a continuation of that on the Castle cliff, probably rises on the shore under St. Leonard’s church, but is not visible in the cliff, till it reaches a spot on the east of the Sussex Hotel, where caves have been cut in the mass of almost uniform sand, not to be distinguished from that of Hastings. It would be very desirable to ascertain by experiment whether marine salt exists in this deposit.
Immediately below the sand-rock (IV.), at the western extremity of the Castle rock, is a
thickness of about 35 feet, of dark brownish, tough, sandy clay, including lignite in considerable quantity, some of the continuous pieces being several feet in length. This group goes down to the level of the road or street; and thence to low water mark, a space about 20 feet in thickness is concealed. But under the Parade on the east of Pelham-place, a floor of grey sand-rock, is exposed at low water, the strike of which seems to be nearly from east to west. It includes crusts and patches of brown oxide of iron ; and is traversed by two sets of cracks, one running nearly north and south, the other from the north of east to south of west, which divide the surface into nearly rhomboidal portions, with angles of 72° and 108°.
VII.— Cliffs on the West of St. Leonard's.—The line of the coast at St. Leonard’s coincides with the strike for about 200 paces west of the arch at the entrance to that place ; and the strata at the water level appear to be horizontal; but about 400 paces west of the Sussex Hotel, the heights turn inland towards the north of west; so that the strata in the retiring portion of the cliff are lower in the series than those upon the shore. They agree with those which are visible at low water beneath the town of Hastings, and with the lower strata in the cliffs around the shallow bay, or cove, at the Lover’s Seat.
VII. a.—The cliff west of the Church is continued for some distance at an uniform height of about 100 feet. It becomes lower in approaching Bopeep ; and at a point where it turns inland, between 200 and 300 paces east of the Martello Tower No. 39, is a floor of sand-rock, at low- water mark, full of grains of oxide of iron, like that of the coast to the eastward; the strike being towards the east about 25° south; and the dip east of north, at an angle of about 11°. The upper part of the cliff at this place, which is about 40 feet high, is composed of brown sand-rock, in beds from 2 inches to 6 in thickness. A grass-covered height, of less elevation, occurs immediately on the west of Bopeep, and the rock exposed there to a thickness of about 10 feet, consists of reddish sandy marl (VII. a.), not distinguishable from the Red marl of Devonshire. A low flat hill about 300 paces west of the Tower No. 40, consists for about 20 feet at the top, of sand alternating with clay, in beds dipping very gently to east of north.
VII. b.—At the east end of the cliff at Bulverhithe, on which stands the Tower No. 43, the beds dip regularly about east 30° north, at an angle of about 1°. Thence, along the shore, to the Tower upon Galley-hill (No. 44.), strata of reddish sandy clay or marl, variegated with light tea-green, are very well disclosed, declining, towards the east, at an angle between 2° and 3°: and above these coloured marls, is brownish sand-rock, about 
On the west of Galley-hill, the strata in the banks, which scarcely can be called cliffs, are inclined slightly to the west of south; and the flat shore, near Cowden Point, consists of beds of clay and sandy clay, varying in colour from dark to bright blue, declining very gently towards the south-west, and extending outwards to some distance under the sea, with a strike towards a point about 1G° south of east. Under the Martello Tower, No. 51, about four miles west from Galley- hill, is sand-rock, with ferruginous seams, and thin alternating beds of clay, slightly inclined to the west; from their situation not improbably one of the groups subordinate to the Weald-clay mentioned by Mr. Martin.
(85.) Endogenites erosa.—In cutting down the cliff on the east of the White Rock, immediately within the site of the new Brewery, large surfaces of the several strata were successively laid bare ; and I was so fortunate as to visit the place when one of them was exposed, which contained a great number of the singular fossil bodies to which the name Endogenites erosa has been given, and to see some of them in their original position before they were disturbed. The workmen assured me that the fossils had been still more numerous in a portion of the same strata cut away not long before.
The place in the series, of the strata which include these fossils, has been already mentioned (p. 1G4-8.). I observed but one line in the face of the cliff which seemed to afford them, about G feet from the top of the group III. b. (81.) and (82.), which was about 10 feet in total thickness. The workmen told me, however, that some were afterwards found at a short distance below, where the strata were still nearly the same. I did not find any specimens of the fossil upon the shore ; but fragments are frequently washed up by the sea in the neighbourhood of this place; and I saw a very large specimen in the face of the bank, on the side of the road over Cuckoo Hill, which joins that from Hollington to Hastings. Mr. Woodbine Parish obtained one, (Plate XIX. fig. 8.), which was dug out in his presence near the Church at St. Leonard’s. Their occurrence at Tilgate Forest, where they were discovered by Mr. Manteli, has been mentioned in the Geological Transactions and in his own publications; and Mr. Martin mentions the Endogenites, as having been found near Mulsey, in Western Sussex, in the first course of sand with reddish clay, subordinate to the Weald-clay, and above the Sussex marble. There can be little doubt that when the corresponding beds in other parts of the Wealden district have been examined, they will be more extensively discovered.
The rapid change of character in the beds of this formation appears from the fact, that the great concretions of grit, several feet in length, and 2 or 3 feet in thickness, which are found upon the shore to the westward, do not occur in this cliff, though not more than 200 paces distant; their place being apparently supplied, in the strata above those which include the Endogenites, by nodular masses of hardened sand-rock. The bed III. b. 2. e. (p. 1G7.) which includes these fossils, passes both above and below into the adjacent strata, but has in general a darker hue. The fossils were closely enveloped in a mass of slightly coherent sandy clay ; and I was enabled, with care, to preserve some specimens, (one of which is represented in Plate XIX. fig. 4. a. and b.) with part of the surrounding rock still adhering, as a proof that the coating of coal by which the nucleus was invested had never been of greater thickness, and that the whole of it was retained.
(85.) All the specimens of this singular fossil which I saw, lay with their longer diameter and their flatter surfaces in the horizontal position. Their appearance when first uncovered by the removal of the rock above, was that of elongated and flattened elliptical bodies, tapering at both extremities; as represented in fig. 1. of the subjoined wood-cut. They consist of two distinct portions ; a stony nucleus, of a dark brownish grey colour, with a very slight tinge of purple ; and a crust or case, in the state of lignite, which has externally a nearly uniform surface, and varies in thickness, in different specimens, and in different parts of the same specimen, from about 1 to 5 an inch. This crust becomes thicker near the extremities of the nucleus, and, in many instances, extends considerably beyond it, in a sort of appendage at both ends; but in other specimens of smaller size these appendages do not appear to have existed. The annexed wood-cut explains the structure of one of the largest specimens, and shows the relative proportion of the parts ; and the figures in Plate XIX. show some of the principal varieties of form which the fossil has hitherto presented.
Fig. 1 of the wood-cut on this page represents the external appearance of the entire fossil, as seen from above ; the situation of the nucleus being indicated by an obscure dotted line. Fig. 2 is a longitudinal and vertical section, on the axis or line a, b ; and fig. 3, a transverse vertical section, on the line c, d; showing the proportion of the coating to the nucleus.
The figures in Plate XIX., which are on a scale of one sixth, in diameter, of the natural dimensions, are intended to represent some of the forms of the complete fossil, and of the nucleus when divested of its coating of coal. They are, however, from necessity so much reduced, as to convey but a very imperfect impression of the bulky objects which they represent.
Fig. 1 represents the greater part of a very large nucleus, of which only one of the extremities seems to be wanting. The remaining extremity is of irregular shape, as if it had been broken ; and the specimen is much compressed in the middle. Fig. 2 is a nucleus apparently complete, tapering towards one extremity, nearly as may be supposed to have been the case in the part which is wanting in Fig. 1. Fig. 3, a and b, are horizontal and side views of a much smaller specimen, still retaining its coaly covering, with part of the smooth surface, hereafter mentioned. Fig. 4 is a larger specimen, with some of the sandy clay in which it was imbedded still adhering, the laminae of which are curved as if they had adapted themselves to its form. The specimen retains the greater part of its covering of coal, which has a smooth outer surface, of a light brown or drab colour: and at the lower part, a portion of the coal has been drawn away from the nucleus, apparently by the contraction of the investing matter to which it strongly adheres. One end of the specimen, where a portion has been accidentally broken off at b, shows the proportionate thickness of the coating to the nucleus within. Fig. 5 is a smaller nucleus, nearly complete, very short in proportion to its width. Figs. 6 and 7 are sections of specimens broken across, and exhibiting the flat surface of the fracture in the nucleus, with the proportion of the coaly covering, and the porous structure of the nucleus. Fig. 8 is the nucleus of a large specimen found by Mr. Woodbine Parish, in the strata near St. Leonard’s Church. It is remarkable for the compressed appearance of one extremity, and seems to have been originally longer in that direction. It still retains a portion of the investing coal, and of the smooth outer surface of that coating, but the greater part has been removed or disturbed. Fig. 9 is taken from a specimen from Tilgate Forest, presented to the British Museum by Mi. Manteli, which is remarkable for its length, its nearly cylindrical figure, and the acute tapering of the extremity. The superficial furrows also, in this specimen, are deeper and much larger than in the greater number of the nuclei found near Hastings; but in this respect it is approached by Figs. 1 and 2. Fig. 10 represents rather more than one half of a complete nucleus, of the natural size: the upper surface of of which fig. b is a separate representation, showing the appearance of a fracture on the line of the longer axis.
(86.) The size of the different specimens varies considerably. The largest that I saw in its place, and from which the foregoing wood-cut was taken, must have been in the whole full nine feet long; but there were portions of other nuclei of greater size, among the fallen specimens previously dug out. The lignite at one extremity was three feet in length; the nucleus 44 feet; and the workmen assured me that the coal at the other end extended to about 18 inches. The width in the middle was 12 inches, and the greatest thickness 4 inches. Another specimen, which had been for some time exposed to decomposition, was about 74 feet long ; the nucleus about 54 feet, with about 12 inches of lignite remaining at each extremity; and from these dimensions there seem to have been gradations down to a few inches in length. The nucleus of the smallest specimen that I obtained, which is represented, of its natural size, in Plate XIX., fig. 10, is not more than 3 inches long, and about 2 inches wide; yet the external figure is complete, and the internal tubes are not smaller than most of those in the largest masses.
(87.) The original form of this vegetable was probably cylindrical; and that shape is still retained in a large specimen of a nucleus from Tilgate Forest, now in the British Museum ; Plate XIX., fig. 9 : but in the majority of the specimens the figure has evidently been compressed, and the section is now an oval variously modified; figs. 6, 7, 10. In those represented in figs. 2 and 9, the extremity is more acute than in the greater number of the specimens. In a few instances (as in fig. 8, and less obviously in figs. 2, and 1,) the nucleus seems to have been suddenly reduced in thickness near the broader end ; but no specimen of this form was observed in situ. None of the specimens exhibited the tapering figure, somewhat like that of a ninepin, represented in the engraving in the Geological Transactions; but many of the broken and worn fragments washed up on the shore near the White Rock had acquired some approach to that form. There was not, in any of the specimens, the slightest indication of lateral branches from the main body; but they all lay as if they had been distributed without connexion in the stratum in which they were found.
(88.) The coaly covering did not, in any instance, show traces of organic structure; it burned with a slight flame when thrown upon hot coals, and in the flame of a candle became white, and was reduced in bulk without losing its form. In some of the fresh specimens it was coated with a thin crust, of a light brownish or drab colour, with a very slight glistening lustre; apparently consisting of compressed clay. This is represented especially in figs. 4, a and b, and partially shown in figs. 3 and 8.
(89.) The internal structure of this fossil has been partially described and represented in the Geological Transaction, by the Secretaries and a Committee of the Members. I am enabled to add some further particulars to what is there stated, through the kindness of my friends Mr. Brown and Mr. Stokes: the former having lent me the specimen represented in Plate XX., fig. 3., and given directions for making the slices, figs. 1. and 2.; to which Mr. Stokes was so good as to add a very thin slice, represented in figs. 1 and 4. a. The vermicular cavities or tubes, of which a longitudinal section is represented in fig. 1., and a transverse section in fig. 2. and 4., are all coated within with transparent quartz crystals, the summits of which are discernible with a lens; and in some cases the cavity of these tubes was partially occupied by exceedingly minute crystals of quartz, either detached in the state of sand, or intermixed with a flocculent coaly matter. The transverse sections of these tubular cavities exhibit a similar change of form, from circular to elliptic, to that shown by the entire plant. In the greater number of cases no trace of truly organic conformation could be detected with the microscope in these sections; but in two specimens a distinct indication of the original vegetable structure was to be seen. These are represented in Plate XX., figs. 3. and 4. The former figure, drawn from the extremity of a solid and opake mass, a little decomposed, shows, within a cavity, a somewhat circular band, exhibiting organic structure, which is probably tubular ; and the same kind of structure is indicated in the other figures, 4. and 4. a, which are taken from a transparent slice belonging to Mr. Stokes; the latter being a more highly magnified portion of fig. 4.
(90.) Fossils of the Wealden.—The catalogue of the organic remains of Sussex, published by Mr. Manteli in the last volume of these Transactions, and which he has stated to have been intended to accompany these pages, renders it unnecessary to insert here the fossils of that portion of the Wealden. The following list, therefore, will contain such species only as have been found in the tracts described in the preceding pages of this paper, or as do not occur in Mr. Mantell’s catalogue: and I have been enabled to add several species to those of my own collection, through the kindness of Lord  Greenock, Mr. Hills, Mr. Martin, and especially of Mr. Manteli.
The Isle of Wight.
(91.) The general relations of the strata on the southern coast of the Isle of Wight, have been described by Mr. Webster2 with so much ability, that little was left to succeeding observers but the task of filling up details, and of supplying some facts respecting the lower members of the series, which did not fall within the immediate scope of his inquiries. Having already published a general account of these lower strata in another placet, I shall here give some farther observations on what is commonly called “the back,” or south side, of the island.
(92.) As the chalk passes entirely across the Isle of Wight, nearly from west to east, in a narrow ridge composed of vertical strata, and again invests a portion of the southern promontory of the island, with a cap of almost horizontal beds, at present detached from the central ridge and extending nearly to the sea,—the result is, that two very distinct sections of the vertical chalk and inclined strata beneath it are disclosed upon the shore, at the extremities of the central range; and again, two other sections, in which the same strata are prolonged from beneath the horizontal chalk, on each side of the promontory that projects towards the south, so as to meet the continuation of those which rise from the middle of the island, and with them form very flat curves. The coast thus exhibits a series of sections of almost unequalled richness and variety : and though the general characters of the strata are well known, there is still quite enough to be learned in this most interesting geological region, to repay such detailed researches as have been of late years devoted to some oilier portions of England, but which those only who reside near the place can carry on with complete success.
(93.) The Section, PI. X. a. No. 7. (which is on the scale of the Ordnance Survey), shows the general order of the strata on the southern coast of (he island, and, with the aid of a good mapj:, will enable the reader to follow ihe ensuing detail. In the lower of the two lines, the heights are on the same scale as the horizontal distances.
Chalk.—The relations of the lowest beds of the chalk are best seen, on the west, at Compton Bay; and on the east, in the cliffs under Bembridge Down ; both sections exhibiting admirably the passage from the white chalk to the Upper green-sand. Large portions of the chalk are pre-
served also at the top of the higher Downs, on the south of the island, resting on a plateau of the Upper green-sand ; and the lower beds of the chalk are in many places visible in descending from these heights, as from Niton to the undercliff, and above Old Park, on the south-west of Wolverton. The gradation of hue and texture, from the whitest chalk,—through various shades of grey, and various degrees of softness, to the state of bluish marl, resembles precisely what is observable in the same part of the series at Beachy-head, on the shore near Folkstone, and on the opposite coast of France, under the cliffs of Blanc Nez.
The central ridge, or anticlinal line of the chalk, it will be remarked, is neither continuous nor rectilinear ; but is divided, about the middle of the island, between Carisbrook and Shorwell, by a tract of irregular ground, intervening between two nearly parallel branches of the chalk range about three miles apart. The first, or southernmost, of these branches runs directly from the Needles to Brixton-down ; the more northern from Arreton-down to Bembridge-down and Culver-cliff. The course of the principal streams of the island is transverse to that of the central chalk range: the river Medina, which nearly bisects the island from north to south, rising high upon the sands, about Stroud Green on the south of Kingston, and running almost directly northward to the estuary at Cowes. The other principal stream, the Eastern Yar, springs beneath the southern chalk, about Whitwell, not far from Niton; and after a tortuous course, instead of joining the sea in Sandown Bay, it cuts through the ridges of the green-sands and the chalk, between Yaverland and Brading. The egress of the streams, therefore, is here analogous to that already described in Kent and Sussex: and this effect may not improbably be ascribed, in both cases, to fissures, by which the lines of drainage were in the first instance determined.
Upper Green-sand.—This formation is but partially disclosed along the base of the central ridge of chalk; but is distinctly seen in the sections at Compton-bay, and on the south of Bembridge- down, and in several places along the escarpment of the undercliff3 ; the course of which, it is to be observed, is not exactly parallel to the anticlinal ridge, but oblique to it, running towards a point about 17° south of west. The total thickness here, in some places approaches to 100 feet, and on an average is not much less than 70 feet: its step-like projection beyond the chalk, as in Western Sussex, is conspicuous in several places, especially beneath St. Catherine’s Down. One of the most accessible sections is in the ground rising above the ravine at Luc- combe, where the road from Shanklin to Bonchurch crosses the strata obliquely. About the middle of Old Park is a continuous section of beds, apparently undisturbed and more than f of a mile in length, rising very gradually towards the south, or west of south, and consisting above, for between 30 and 40 feet, of subcalcareous sand and stone, alternating with chert in concretions,— and below of similar sand, with spongiform masses, like those of the upper part of the sections near Folkstone; (21.) and (22.). But one of the best sections, perhaps, of the Upper green-sand, is visible above the road from Niton, towards Blackgang-Chine, over the Sand-rock spring. The brow of the cliff at that place is about 591 feet above the sea j- ; and the beds composing the vertical face at top, which is itself more than 100 feet high, may be thus divided:
Gault.—This stratum consists, in the Isle of Wight, of dark, bluish grey, harsh, sandy clay, interspersed with minute particles of mica: but I did not discover, anywhere, the beds of light bluish, plastic clay, like that of Folkstone, which abounds in the characteristic fossils, and which, I believe, forms the lower part of the formation. The clay here, which seems not to exceed 70 feet in thickness, contains very few fossils, and these, from their imperfect preservation, are difficult to obtain. The tract, however, which this stratum occupies has been very little explored. One of the best sections of the gault which I saw, was at East-End, between Luccombe and Bonchurch, where the clay contains nodules, and branching crystalline rods of pyrites, some thin shells in fragments, and minute crystals of sulphate of lime, perhaps produced by decomposition. The top of the sands beneath this stratum, here slopes both towards the west, and outward, towards the sea ; so that on the melting away of the gault, everything favours the subsidence and ruin of the upper part of the cliffs.
Lower Green-sand.—This stratum, which forms the principal portion of Mr. Webster’s ‘ Ferruginous Sands,’ occupies a great part of the surface on the south of the Isle of Wight, and is everywhere conformable to the chalk; a ridge of highly inclined strata of sand parallel to that of the central chalk, crossing the island, from the shore on the south of Bembridge Down to the foot of Afton Down. The sands are then reflected southwards, and form the lower ground in the interior, from Mottestone, through Brixton, Shorwell, Kingston, Godshill, and Newchurch, to the coast. Throughout the greater part of the shore at the ‘ back of the island,’this stratum is either below the level of the sea, or concealed by the debris of the undercliff; but where it rises,— westward from Rocken-End, and eastward from Bonchurch Cove, it exhibits the most distinct and fully developed sections.
When I examined the Isle of Wight, I was not aware of the subdivision of the Lower green-sand into the groups, which I afterwards found to be so well displayed in Kent (16, &c.), and Western Sussex (72.) ; but from the map of the island, and the characters of the strata on the coast, I have no doubt that it exists also here. A range of heights from Kingston to Walpen, which in the Ordnance Map is a very prominent feature, and seems to be continued to the shore between Walpen and Whale Chines, appears to be the outcrop of the upper member of the formation ; and the heights on the south of Chale seem also to belong to this uppermost or ferruginous subdivision; while the darker beds of Shanklin and Blackgang Chines must represent the middle, or more retentive group : and even among the highly inclined strata of the Red-cliff, in Sandown Bay, green, mud-like, beds are distinguishable in the corresponding part of that escarpment. A bed at the bottom of the cliffs, both at Atherficld, and on the east of Shanklin, which abounds in fossils, especially the Gryphcea sinuata, is probably the equivalent of the lowest group of stone at Hythe. The total thickness of the Lower green-sand in the Isle of Wight may be considered as about 300 feet.
(94.) The Purbeck strata do not make their appearance in the Isle of Wight; and the two remaining members of the Wealden pass into each other by insensible gradation, the Weald clay constituting but a small proportion of the whole. A valley or depression, however, corresponding to the site of the clay, is still a well-marked natural feature : the escarpment of the green-sands projecting over it on the one hand; while on the other, the Hastings sands rise into a small prominence, even in the compressed section of Sandown Bay; and form, on the west, an undulating, dome-shaped ridge, between Barne’s Chine and Compton-Grange Chine, the section of which corresponds to that of these sands on the Sussex coast.
SUMMARY AND GENERAL REMARKS.
(163.) The order of the strata mentioned in the preceding pages is represented generally in the abstract.
Thickness of Strata.—I have not inserted in the engraved section the thickness of the groups; both because it varies much in different places, and that in general my estimates are so loose as not to be relied upon. Accurate measurements of the thickness of the English strata have very seldom been made. The following are approximate numbers, derived however, principally, from estimates by the eye.
Chalk.—The entire thickness of the chalk is exposed in many of the sections on the southeastern coast; hut westward of the Isle of Wight the beds are convergent and much reduced in bulk. Between Deal and Folkstone, Mr. W. Phillips has estimated the total thickness at 820 feet1. The two sections at the extremities of the Isle of Wight, between Whitecliff and Sandown Bays on the east,—and between Alum Bay and Broadbench, at the western extremity of the central ridge, furnish good evidence ; the strata being so nearly vertical, that the horizontal line across their direction, does not very much exceed the perpendicular to their surfaces. Mr. Greenough has accordingly estimated the thickness at Culver at 1300 feet2; and the interval on the Ordnance map, which is very nearly the same at the two extremities of the island, (being in both places about 2 furlongs, or 1320 feet,) may probably be considered as somewhat exceeding the maximum thickness of the chalk in England.
Mr. Conybeare estimates the chalk as ranging between 600 and 1000 feet; and Mr.Dela Beche at 700. The height of the cliff at Beachy Head, which includes at top part of the flinty chalk, and goes down very nearly to the Upper green-sand, is only 535 feet; but if 250 feet be added, for the remainder of the flinty chalk, (350 being the thickness of that division near Dover the aggregate thickness on the Sussex coast will he about 800 feet.
At Wendover Hill, the summit employed as the Ordnance Station is 905 feet above the sea; and the canal at Wendover being 404 feet, and still within the chalk, the difference, 500 feet, is certainly less than the total thickness at that place.
But the whole of the chalk passed through in the boring above mentioned, at Diss in Norfolk6, (which includes at the top 100 feet without flints,) was only 510 feet.
The wide range of variation in thickness above stated (supposing the measures to be correct), arises in a great measure from the unequal abrasion and removal of the upper strata; but must in part also be ascribed to original inequality in the thickness of the chalk itself.
Upper green-sand.—The thickness of this group near Folkstone does not exceed 30 feet, and is probably much less3; but it swells out considerably near Godstone, and Merstham, and at the latter place is upwards of 30 feet thick10. The depth of the wells sunk through it, in the Malm rock strata of Hampshire, varies from 60 to 100 feet. In Western Sussex the thickness is between 70 and 80 feet; in the Isle of Wight, about 70 feet. At Blackdown the thickness of the sand is about 100 feet ; in the Vale of Wardour, probably from 60 to 804; near Swindon, 30 to 50 feet: but at the Castle Hill, Cambridge, it is not more than ,18 inches. Thence through West Norfolk, the stratum is not anywhere distinctly seen; and at Hunstanton, the only beds which can be supposed to represent it, are not more than 2 feet thick.
Gault.—The thickness of this stratum near Copt Point, derived from barometric measurement, is about 130 feet8. In the interior it is difficult to obtain good estimates, and accurate measures can be expected only in wells. At Merstham it is about 150 feet thick; in the Isle of Wight probably about 70 feet: at Ridge, in the Vale of Wardour, it is about 75 feet; at Cotmore Wells near Thame, 90 feet. In Cambridgeshire, the entire stratum has been cut through repeatedly in wells and borings, which give an average thickness of 150 feet; but at Mildenhall in Suffolk, the blue clay, which seems to represent it, is only 9 feet. In West Norfolk Mr. Rose considers that the utmost thickness cannot be more than 15 feet; and at Hunstanton the red marly beds which are supposed to contain Gault fossils, are only 4 feet thick.
Lower green-sand.—The measured thickness of this formation can be most easily obtained on the shore between Copt Point and Hythe, where the uppermost subdivision is about 70 feet thick17; the middle group, 70 to 100 feet; and the lowest, 60 to 80 feet19; the total thickness consequently about 250 feet. In Western Sussex, Mr. Murchison states that nearly 400 feet of sand were passed through in a boring, at Petworth Summerhouse20; and Mr. Martin conceives that the two lower members may be together about 150 feet thick21. In the Isle of Wight the thickness, between Bonchurch Cove and Sandown, Rocken End and Atherfield Rocks, cannot be less than that of the formation near Folkstone, and seems to be much greater. At Brill, in Buckinghamshire, about 26 feet remain; in West Norfolk, Mr. Rose considers the thickness of the whole formation to be about 80 feet.
IVealden.—No measures, on good estimates, of the thickness of the strata in this group have yet been obtained. Mr. Martin assigns 281 feet to the Weald-clay cut through in boring, at Petworth in Western Sussex; but in the section at Tiepit and Cowleaze Chine in the Isle of Wight, the clay seems to be no more than 140 feet thick.
The section of that part of the Hastings-sands which is visible between St. Leonard's Church and the top of the great sand rock bed, may be about 200 to 250 feet; the sand rock bed itself, under the castle, about 80 to 120 feet; and thence to the lowest point upon the coast, east of Hastings, about 200 or 250.—Total thickness, between 400 and 500 feet.
It is difficult, from their contortions, to estimate the thickness of the Purbeck strata on the coast. Mr. Webster has given in detail the stratification of a portion of them, which amounts to 124 feet, 8 inches; to which may be added about 150 feet,—making a total of about 275. In the Vale of Wardour, the total remaining thickness of the group appears to be from 40 to 60 feet, and in Buckinghamshire still less. Mr. De la Beche estimates the whole formation at 250 feet. The aggregate thickness, therefore, of the three groups which compose the Wealden, cannot, probably, be less than 800 feet.
Portland stone.—This formation being well defined and fully exposed, its thickness is well ascertained; and in Portland Island it seems to range between 60 feet and about 70; at Swindon it is about 60 to 65: at Great Hazeley in Oxfordshire 27 feet; at Brill, about 23 feet; near Quainton and Whitchurch in Buckinghamshire, from 4 to 20 feet.
Portland sand.—Near St. Alban’s Head, Isle of Purbeck, 120 to 140 feet; in the Isle of Portland, 80 feet; near Thame in Oxfordshire, about 50 feet.
Kimmeridge clay.—The thickness of this group is uncertain, and seems to vary much in different places. On the coast Messrs. Buckland and De la Beche assign to it 600 feet, at Kimmeridge Bay; but they state the thickness at Ringstead Bay to be only 300 feet. At the Headington quarries in Oxfordshire, I found, in one of the pits, only 20 feet of clay. The general thickness is stated by Mr. De la Beche to be 500 feet.
Oxford oolite.—On the coast near Weymouth, 150 feet. The whole, in Wiltshire, according to Mr. Lonsdale, about 200 feet18; Mr. De la Beche, 150 feet.
Oxford clay.—On the Dorsetshire coast, near Weymouth, 300 feet: at Lynn in West Norfolk Mr. Rose assigns to this formation the whole depth of a well, which would make the thickness about 630 feet; but part of this depth may possibly be Kimmeridge clay. Mr. De la Beche’s estimate for the whole formation is 600 feet.
(164.) Order of Geological Events.—The succession of events which the preceding’ pages demonstrate, has been already detailed in some other publications; but they are too important not to be recited here. The evidence bearing on the following propositions, derived from the South Eastern Coast, the Vale of Wardour, and Buckinghamshire, is all in perfect harmony; and the inferences are so directly connected with the facts, as to be rather corollaries than deductions from them.
Deposition, beneath the sea, of the following groups of strata, beginning with the lowest:—
Sudden, or rapid, depression of the entire Wealden, to such a depth as to be covered with salt water; proved by the sudden and exclusive appearance of marine productions and fossils, above and in immediate apposition with strata containing only freshwater fossils, though mineralogically of the same composition, (100.) p. 196-7.
(165.) Local Distribution of the Strata.—If a line drawn from the coast at Folkstone, touching- London on the north, and thence towards Newport Pagnell; and another line from about Atherfield in the Isle of Wight towards Faringdon in Berkshire, the tract intervening will comprise the space throughout which the beds immediately below the chalk are most fully developed : and if the standard be taken from the condition of the strata when possessed of their greatest bulk, that of the Green-sands and Wealden may be said to occur in Kent, Sussex, and the Isle of Wight; from which central tract these groups appear to thin out in every direction.
The whole series immediately below the chalk is finely developed between Farnham and Petersfield and around the west end of the VVealden denudation; the Lower green-sand, especially, is nowhere better disclosed, except in the Isle of Wight. It is not improbable, that the part of these groups which once intervened between the Isle of Wight and the Sussex coast, and is now concealed by the sea, was likewise fully expanded; but at Folkstone the Upper green-sand has already become much thinner.
It remains yet to be ascertained whether in their prolongation northward in England, and towards the east on the continent of Europe, these groups again assume their more bulky and varied form, as our Upper green-sand is observed to do after reduction, even within very short distances ; and whether, if they do so expand, the relative proportions of the component members be the same in remote countries; an inquiry which is the more interesting in the case of the green-sand formation, from its very wide diffusion, and the great space which it occupies in different parts of Europe.
Details.—The following are some of the local variations in the strata composing the groups above referred to :—
Chalk.—It may be remarked that the chalk rises much more rapidly towards its outcrop, between Wiltshire and Hertfordshire, than in the more northern counties of the South East of England. In departing from that central tract, both towards Devonshire on the south, and northwards, the rise is comparatively small; the beds shooting out very gradually, and occupying very wide spaces of uniform, flat country. The disturbance, by which the ridge of the Wealds and the parallel range of elevations through the Isle of Wight and Dorsetshire were produced, wasprobably the principal cause of this variation: and the mean course of the Thames itself, from the point where it cuts through the chalk, may possibly be connected with that derangement. But in the chalk itself, on the south-west of London, much local variation is found in the angle and direction of the dip; and from the facts mentioned by Mr. De la Beche, respecting the faults in Devonshire, and what I have seen of the minor irregularities on the shore near Hastings, it is probable that if the whole surface in this part of England were examined with equal attention, it would prove to be pervaded by cracks and slight dislocations.
The Upper green-sand is especially remarkable for great variation in its thickness and composition ; and it is everywhere so intimately connected with the lowest beds of the chalk, that if we had more accurate measurements of our strata, the total thickness of that formation, including the Upper green-sand—might, perhaps, be found to be nearly uniform. The latter passes most commonly by insensible gradation into the soft dark-coloured marly chalk. In many cases, it forms a very thin and scarcely distinguishable group,—as near Folkstone, where it is not more than 20 feet thick ; in others, the chert which it contains becomes conspicuous, and it affords also beds of firestone, which together giving it firmness and durability, cause it to project as a step or prominence beyond the foot of the chalk range.
On the west of Portland, the green-sands thin out so rapidly, that at Blackdown a series about 500 feet thick is their only representative; and it is difficult to decide whether this be a condensed equivalent, of the whole group between the chalk and the lowest green-sand,—or, (which seems to be more probable,) only a continuation of the lower part of the Upper green-sand, from the Vale of Wardour. In following the range of these formations towards the north-east, a similar reduction of the green-sands is observable, as the section at Hunstanton remarkably proves; but the diminution is by no means uniform throughout the intermediate space. Along the coast of Devonshire, the beds at the bottom of the upper sand seem to adopt the characters which the Lower green-sand exhibits in other places; and the latter, as well as the usually intervening gault seems to be wanting. In the Vale of Wardour also, where the Lower sand is scarcely apparent, the Upper green-sand exhibits many of its characters ; but the Gault is very distinct between them.
The Gault is seen in the greatest perfection on the coast at Folkstone, where its fossils are especially beautiful and numerous. It seems to be thinner and to contain few fossils in the Isle of Wight, and is almost wholly wanting on the west of Purbeck. But in the interior—in the Vale of Wardour, and thence northward to the sea at Hunstanton,—this stratum everywhere appears, and contains throughout many of the same fossils, though it changes its character and is much reduced in bulk in Norfolk.
The almost constant presence of this distinct band of clay between the chalk and Lower greensand, considering its small relative thickness, is a remarkable fact: and its retention, both in England and on the Continent, of the same mineralogical characters and fossils, renders the Gault a very important member of the series. I have seen it in its proper place, and in the form of bluish clay, all around the Lower Boulonnois; in the vicinity of Aix-la-Chapelle; and in the country between that place and Liege.
The Lower green-sand thins out remarkably towards the west, from the central tract just mentioned, (p. 321-2.). The traces of it in the Vale of Wardour are obscure, but they become gradually more distinct towards the north. The subdivisions of the Kentish coast, detailed in (16.) to (35.) and in Sussex (72.), deserve comparison with the more expanded equivalents of this formation in other countries. Their existence in the Isle of Wight is almost certain; and they will probably be found in Bedfordshire : but thence, north-eastward, the sands again become thinner, though they still preserve their relative place.
The Wcalden.—This group, also, is best developed near the central tract already pointed out. The Weald-clay is seen in the greatest perfection in the Isle of Wight; and the Hastings-sand in the Forest ridge of Kent and Sussex, &c. But the Purbeck strata are fully expanded only in the Isle of Purbeck, and on the adjacent coast of Dorsetshire. No traces of any member of this group have been found west of the Isle of Portland; nor eastward of that island, near the coast, except in the vicinity of Battle in Sussex. In the Vale of Wardour, the Weald-clay and Hastings-sands are reduced almost to nothing ; and they have not yet been found along the line of the green-sands between that place and the neighbourhood of Oxford. Thence, to Quainton and Whitchurch in Buckinghamshire, the representatives of the Purbeck strata, though perfectly distinct, are but a few feet in thickness, and belong to the lowest beds of the formation. Other indications of the Wealden may be looked for, north of Whitchurch, in the detached portions of sand represented in Mr. Smith’s maps of Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire: and the specimens of Lonchopteris said to occur at Wansford on the north-east of Northamptonshire, (if they be really found in situ), would prove that the Hastings-sands exist at that place. The places beyond the limits of the tract described in the preceding pages, in which the existence of the Wealden has been ascertained, or rendered probable, are mentioned hereafter, (168.) p. 326.
The sudden change from the marine fossils of the Lower green-sand to the freshwater productions of the Wealden is remarkably exhibited at Atherfield in the Isle of Wight (100.) p. 196; where the former stratum contains nearly thirty species, of about twenty genera; while the Weald- clay, not more than ten feet vertically beneath, contains scarcely any other shells than Cypris, Cyclas, and Paludina. The contrast, in descending from the Wealden group, is equally striking and abrupt;—the Purbeck strata near their junction with the Portland affording scarcely any fossil but Cypris, while the “ Roche” at the top of the Portland group, within a few inches of the freshwater limestone, is full of marine remains. 
The Wealden strata, though differing so widely as to their fossils, appear to be conformable to those of the adjoining formations, both below them and above. On the Dorsetshire coast, in the Vale of Wardour, and in Buckinghamshire, the Purbeck beds correspond exactly in dip and direction to the Portland stone beneath; and at Hythe in Kent, and in the Isle of Wight, the lowest beds of the green-sand are perfectly continuous with the upper beds of the Weald-clay, (98.) p. 189. The only place with which I am yet acquainted, where a want of conformity is indicated between these formations, is at Stopham in West Sussex, adverted to in p. 156. But the eroded cavities, filled with what seem to be green-sand and Fuller’s earth, in the upper part of many of the quarries in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, (of which those at Great Ilazeley and Dinton are good examples,) indicate an interval and some intervening disturbance, between the periods of their production.
(166.) Theory of the IVealden.—’The mode in which the Wealden is disposed, in the South-east of England, accords with the hypothesis of its having originated in a lake of fresh water, or in the estuary of a large river. It remains to be determined whether similar deposits are found to occupy a corresponding situation in other parts of the great European basin, of which England is but a small portion.
The chalk and green-sands in England are so frequently prolonged beyond the limits of the beds below, concealing their outcrop, that no certain inference can be drawn with respect to the continuity beneath them of the Wealden and Portland strata. It is not improbable that what now appear to be detached portions, may in many cases be united; but it seems to be consistent with the mode in which freshwater deposits have been formed, whether in lakes or estuaries, that they should, in more extensive regions, occur in detached, rather than continuous portions; and that the outlines of the spaces which they occupy should be irregular. The former existence of the upper Wealden strata in the interior of England, is rendered probable by the erosion of the Purbeck beds in many places where the Lower green-sand comes into contact with them, (151.) p. 286,—which has clearly been effected by the action of water, and proves that something was carried away, before the sand was deposited : the argument from these appearances being the same as that derived from the erosions on the surface of the Oxford oolite and of the chalk.
The great extent of the surface occupied by water in North America is a striking feature in every ordinary map. Dr. Richardson, in his observations on the geology of that region, has remarked that a large tract near the confines of the primitive and secondary regions is occupied by lakes of the most varied outlines and dimensions;—in which the deposition of shells and other exuviae of organized beings has been going on ever since the surface of the globe assumed its present aspect. If that part of the northern hemisphere were now to be sunk beneath the sea, we should probably have, after a short time, one universal sheet of marine strata, lodged upon the surface of the present land, so as to conceal not only the deposits of the several lakes, but the intervals between them : and if we could, then, examine the internal structure of the tract, we should find it to be occupied by a numerous series of Wealdens, detached from each other, and bordered, it is more than probable, by deposits analogous to those of the dirt-beds of Portland, wherever the fluctuations of the lacustrine waters left time and space for the growth of plants upon their margin. The external boundaries of these deposits would be as various and irregular as that of the lakes which now diversify the map of North America: and we should expect, in such cases, that the mineral components in the deposits of the lakes, would vary according to the nature of the surrounding land. Their fossil contents would, probably, have a great general resemblance throughout large districts; but, in the remoter tracts would differ as much as the productions of modern lakes are found to vary;—as those of the lakes in the North of England differ from those of Switzerland, and both from those of the South of France, &c.; or, as in America, those of Slave-Lake differ from the productions of Lake-Superior or Lake-Erie. The lacustrine deposits, again, would be occasionally diversified by the presence of the products of estuaries, such as those of the St. Lawrence and of other rivers around Hudson’s Bay and the north-east coast of America; and in these we should probably find, along with the species of shells which usually inhabit the mouths of large rivers and the borders of the sea, some scattered remains of the products of the adjacent shores,—the plants and animals of the land, with some admixture of freshwater shells.
(167.) JVealden in other Districts.—The following are the places beyond the limits of the tract described in the preceding pages, in which the presence of the Wealden strata has hitherto been ascertained, or rendered probable.
Scotland.—In the Isle of Skye Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison discovered, in cliffs of blue shale associated with trap, on the eastern shore of Loch Staffen, flattened masses of limestone, containing several species of shells; some of which are identical with fossils which I had found in the upper beds of the Weald-clay at Swanage Bay on the Dorsetshire coast; and all the rest are freshwater species belonging to genera found in the Wealden of the south5. The coincident species are the following; some of which are figured in the plates subjoined to these pages.
 There can be little doubt, therefore, as Mr. Murchison has inferred, that this deposit was contemporaneous with the English Wealden.
Continent of Europe.—The places out of England, where the equivalents of the Wealden beds have hitherto been found, are the two following.
In the Lower Bonlonnois the presence of the lower member of the group, at least, is certain; the strata being almost identical with some of those upon the confines of the Purbeck and Portland formations in Dorsetshire and the Vale of Wardour. Having given an account of that part of the French coast on another occasion f, it will be sufficient to mention here, that the line of the cliffs from Equihen on the south of Boulogne to Cape Grisnez on the north of that place, is capped at intervals with a thin crust of the Purbeck strata, resting upon those of Portland, and consisting of slaty beds of limestone, which contain freshwater shells, and include a bed of tough dark-coloured clay, in which are numerous fragments of silicified coniferous trunks not distinguishable from those of the Isle of Portland. It is highly probable that a more exact examination of this part of the series, in the cliffs near Boulogne, may lead to the detection of these trunks in the upright position ; and of the Cycadeae by which they are accompanied on the Dorsetshire coast.
The Pays de Bray, near Beauvais, is a narrow tract on the line from Dieppe to Beauvais, extending in length, from the north-west of Neufchatel to the south of the latter city, a distance of about thirtyEnglish miles, and in breadth, at the widest part near the middle, about eight English miles. (See the annexed Map, Plate IX.) It is an opening, or valley of elevation, in the chalk, within which a very slight elevation of the central tract has brought into view the subjacent strata, as far down as those which immediately precede the representative of our Oxford oolite, with perhaps the mountain limestone beneath. I have not myself examined this interesting district; and the only publications relating to it that I have seen, are the report of the proceedings of the Geological Society of Paris during their excuision to Beauvais in 1831, and the splendid work of M. Passy on the Geology of the Department of the Lower Seine:—but from the notes and sectional sketch of M. Cordier in the former of these works, and the full descriptions of M. Passy, there can be no doubt that the strata in the Pays de Bray are the same with the upper part of the series in the Lower Boulonnois.
The following is the order of the strata in the Pays de Bray, with what appear to me to be their equivalents in England; my list of equivalents, I am glad to find, coinciding very nearly with that of M. Passy himself, generally, in England, as no more than in a particular and subordinate bed of the Glauco-ferruginous sands.
These terms are applied to green-sand passing into grit, which again passes into a calcaire glauconnieux. Both the grit and limestone are full of green particles : they alternate with beds of sand, and are generally quarried throughout the Pays de Bray : and the gres calcaire is stated to the identical with that observed by M. Rozet, at Mont Lambert in the Boulonnois. Among the fossils are Ammonites ; Crassatella ; Cucullaea ; Ostrea ; Serpula ; Trigonia ; and teeth of the Diodon.
M. Passy justly expresses doubt whether this grit has hitherto been recognised in England. I believe it to belong to what I have proposed to call the Portland-sand; the characters and relations of which, though long since generally intimated by Mr. Conybeare, have not hitherto been fully understood in England: and, from my own observation, I have no doubt that some of the concretional masses of the Boulonnois belong to this part of our series. It will be observed, on comparing M. Passy’s sections with those in the'interior of England, that the lower greenish grit (Portland-sand) of M. Passy f, is not conformable to the beds above;—a fact analogous to the existence of chasms and “gullies”, in the Lower Purbeck, and upper part of the Portland strata, in Oxfordshire and Bucks.
Calcaire glauconnieux;—a limestone composed of fragments of shells, united by sparry carbonate of lime, containing green particles, rolled grains of quartz, and flints of different hues. The fossils include Ostrea gregarea, and other indistinct species; Trigonia; and Crassatella. The limestone in this group alternates with grit, and includes a bed of green or bluish marl. The whole belongs to the group between the Portland-sand and the Oxford-oolite in the Lower Boulonnois and is represented in England by part of the series on the coast near Weymouth.
The strata of this group are described as occurring unconformably—(“ etendues en couches discordantes”), beneath the ferruginous sands: a statement which accords with the relations of the group to the Upper green-sand,—but not to the sands of Portland. The formationis characterized by Gryphcea Virgula, and some of the beds contain Ostrea deltoidea. On the coast, from Havre towards Henqueville, it occupies a thickness of 30 metres (about 100 English feet), between the chalk and the oolite J; and it seems to be the equivalent of the series of shale, limestone, and cal- ciferous grit abounding in petrifactions, which connects the Kimmeridge-clay with the Oxford oolite, on the coast of the Boulonnois, and of Dorsetshire.
The lowest strata of the Pays de Bray “consist of blackish compact limestone, like that of “ Marquise in the Lower Boulonnois ;—the carboniferous limestone of England : ” and these succeed immediately to the group last mentioned. If this be so, the oolitic series, from the Oxford oolite to the bottom of the lias, is wanting; together with new red sandstone and the coal formation :—another point of resemblance to the Lower Boulonnois.
(168.) Marine deposits coeval with the Wealden.—It is obvious that, during a period of time sufficient for the accumulation of the Wealden, the deposition of matter in the adjacent seas could not have been inconsiderable ; so that we might expect to find, interposed between the strata which then formed the bottom of the sea, and the Low er green-sand, a series of beds coeval with the Wealden in point of date, but differing from it in possessing the characters of a marine deposit, and including marine shells and other productions of salt water;—with which, near the shore, the productions of the land, or even the freshwater shells of the rivers, might be occasionaly intermixed. And if the Portland strata constituted at that epoch, both the dry land, and the bottom of the sea, and were afterwards submerged, we ought now to find the Lower greensand, in some places immediately in contact with the Portland,— in others with the Wealden,—and in others again with the marine equivalent of this latter group.
Two results would probably attend the state of things here supposed, which are deserving of notice : 1st, That the Wealden and its marine equivalent could not both be found in the same place; and consequently, (since we have the former in England), that the marine beds of that date are not to be expected generally in this country : 2ndly, That the marine fossils of the beds cotemporaneous with the Wealden would probably be distinct, both from those of the Portland group beneath, and of the Green-sands above them; a consideration which gives peculiar interest to the fossils of this intermediate group.
The strata between the chalk and the oolitic system on the continent of Europe have not yet been sufficiently examined, to furnish all the evidence that may be expected upon this subject; but indications of such an equivalent to our Wealden as has been mentioned, have been already found in so many detached points, that its occurrence in other places, or even the existence of a continuous marine deposit of that age, is by no means improbable. Mr. De la Beche has brought together evidence which shows that such a group exists in the department of the Haute Saone, in France ; at Candern, in the Brisgau ; near Aarau ; in Poland ; and on the confines of Silesia. To these may be added the Isle of Bornholm in the Baltic, and the vicinity of Helsing- burg, in Scania, which have afforded specimens of fossil plants resembling those of our Wealden, along with marine shells ; but at Bornholm, although the shells are also marine, they are generally such as may be supposed to have inhabited, either the estuary of a large river, or the seas immediately adjacent to the coast.
In most of the cases mentioned by Mr, De la Beche, a group of strata between the chalk and the oolitic system is found to contain pisiform iron ore; but the fossils which accompany that mineral are marine. A very extensive deposit of this kind in Poland and Silesia is described by Professor Pusch, which includes also argillaceous iron ore; and among its fossils are the genera Ammonites, Cardium, Venus, Trigonia, Sanguinolaria. The pisiform ore of the Haute Saone appears from the statements of M. Thirria to be above the Portland strata ; but its relations to the superior formations are less distinct. It contains Ammonites, Hamites, Nerinea, Cirrus, Terebratula, and Pentacrinites, with teeth of fishes and of Saurians : and it is observable that the uppermost stratum in the group supposed by M. Thirria to represent the Portland stone, is “a compact conchoidal “ limestone, a little tubercular, which contains a species of Paludina? near to Vivipara fluviorum “ of Sowerby; ”—a description which might very well be applied to some of our Purbeck strata.
M. Walchner has ascertained that the pisiform and reniform iron ores of Candern, belong to two distinct formations, of very different date. The lower rests upon beds of “Jura limestone”, which he refers to the Coral-rag or Portland-stone, and which are decidedly below the molasse of Switzerland. The second and more recent pisolitic deposit occupies eroded cavities on the surface of several different formations; it consists of transported matter containing fossil bones, and is not covered by any solid strata. M. Merian is cited by M. Walchner in support of this view of the relations of these deposits; but in the description given by the former, of the strata which immediately cover the pisiform ore of Aarau, there are features very like those of our Wealden itself: for they are mentioned as consisting of “ grit and bituminous schist passing into lignite, and “ containing a great number of petrifactions, among which, though commonly indistinct, are a “ Planorbis, and other freshwater shells.”
The doubt which obviously presents itself with respect to the evidence above mentioned, is, whether a formation thus contiguous to the green-sands, and so very nearly coeval with them, may not really be a part of that formation itself; the presence of some fossils distinct from ours, not being sufficient to prohibit this identification. But the peculiar character and abundance of the iron ore, are important circumstances of difference.	
The evidence respecting Bornholm occurs in a paper read before the Geological Society by Dr. Beck of Copenhagen, who states that the beds below the cretaceous group in that island, exhibit many of the characters of a coal formation, containing coal and numerous impressions of ferns, among which are several of the genus Pecopteris; and with these was found the seed vessel of a Restiacea, considered by Dr. Beck as identical with one from the Hastings-sand at Heathfield in Sussex, which he himself had seen in Mr. Mantell’s collection. The existence in the vicinity of Hoer, of fossil plants analogous to those of the Wealden, but probably belonging to the oolitic series, had been previously pointed out by Mr. Adolphe Brongniartf : but from what has been very recently mentioned to me by Professor Nilsson of Lund, after he had examined some of our best collections of the Wealden fossils, it is probable that a deposit contemporaneous with that formation may be found at Helsingburg in Scania, between the chalk and green-sands which occur near the coast of the Baltic, and the Lias, known to exist on the north-west of that place;
The observations of M. Boblaye in the north of M. Desnoyers in the north-west, and of M.Dufresnoy; in the south-west of France ; with those of M. Elie de Beaumont, on the boundary of the Paris and London Basins; of Mr. De la Beche, M. de Caumontff, M. Desnoyers, M. Constant Prevost, and M. Passy, on the coast of Normandy and the adjacent district; and more recently of M. Thirria, in the department of the Haute Saonef, have shown that many of the beds between the chalk and the oolitic system in the different provinces of France, agree with each other, and with those of England, perhaps as nearly as the more distant portions of the same formations are found to do in our country: the Portland strata, which form the lower boundary of the Wealden, occurring at several detached points along their course ; while above them, the chalk affords a limit which cannot be mistaken. It may deserve the inquiry, therefore, of resident geologists, whether traces at least, of all the intermediate groups between the Portland and the chalk may not be detected generally along the line of connexion; and I am not without hope that the task of comparative examination may be assisted by the preceding pages.
Among the points deserving of notice by those who examine the beds below the chalk in districts imperfectly known, I would mention especially the characters of the Portland Sand;—from the facility with which that formation may be confounded with other sands, likewise charged with green particles. I have reason to believe that a neglect of the distinctions between these different sands, and a consequent ignorance of the distance by which they are separated in the series of strata, has produced difficulty, and led to much confusion in the arrangement of the groups between the chalk and the oolitic system.
(169.) Beds below the Wealden.—The groups next below the Wealden, in the tracts described in the preceding pages, are connected by several characters; the Portland sand forms a transition to the Kimmeridge clay; and the latter, at its lower part becomes charged with sand and calcareous matter, and passes insensibly into the Oxford oolite. The fossils, also, of these associated groups are very much allied, and there is no reason to suppose that the deposition of this part of the series was interrupted by any important change of circumstances.
Portland strata.—The space occupied by the Portland strata, so far as they have yet been discovered in England, is bounded on the west by a line passing from Portland to the outcrop of the Portland stone in the Vale of Wardour, and thence towards Swindon. On the east of that line the Purbeck and Portland formations are visible only in the remaining portions of the continuous sheet, which seems originally to have invested a great part of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire. Whether the Portland beds exist, or ever have existed, under the sands of the Isle of Wight, Sussex, and Kent, it is now impossible to say; though it is probable that they did so, from their occurrence on the opposite coast of France, and their thickness in that quarter.
The peculiar circumstance relating to the junction of this formation with the Purbeck beds, is the distinct character of superficial soil, which the bed in which the trees and Cycadeae are found, exhibits in the Isle of Portland. Trees and plants have occurred in the upright position in many other places, and in other parts of the series of strata; but the soil in those cases had lost its recent character, and been in a great measure assimilated to the surrounding matter. Some other thin beds alternating with the lowest strata of the Purbeck limestone, have likewise more or less of the character of a mechanical agglomerate ; but none of them approach to the gravellike texture and composition of the “Black-dirt” of Portland and the adjacent coast.
The small extent which the Portland strata occupy with reference to the Kimmeridge clay, is a remarkable fact; showing either that the former, like the Coral-rag, was originally deposited in detached portions;—or that the portions of the Portland group that we now see, are only the remaining and eroded borders of one continuous coating originally lodged upon the clay.
It is remarkable, also, that the Wealden has not yet been found beyond the limits of the Portland group ; never reposing, as the green-sands are frequently seen to do, on any of the formations beneath the Portland stone : but before this exclusion be adopted, it will be necessary to examine more completely the counties on the north of Buckinghamshire. Reciprocally, in all the places where the Portland beds have hitherto been found, one or more members of the Wealden group are connected with it. It is possible, therefore, that the Portland strata formed the only land, at the period when the freshwater beds of the Wealden group began to be deposited.
The Kimmeridge clay thus more widely diffused than the Portland and the Wealden, forms the continuation upwards, of a long series of alternate strata of oolitic limestones, sand, and clay. The extent, thickness, and development, of this formation, vary much in different places, the upper beds alone being visible at the point from whence the name has been derived. The relations of the groups are fully seen on the coast near Weymouth, and still more completely on the shore of the Boulonnois, and near Scarborough : but, although the clay extends, without interruption, from Dorsetshire to Norfolk, it is seldom seen to advantage in the interior of England. Near Oxford, the lower members, which form the transition from the bituminous clays of Kimmeridge to the Oxford oolite, are evidently wanting; and the surface of the calcareous reestone beneath the clay, is deeply worn and eroded.
(170.) Composition of Strata.—Among-the circumstances relating to the composition of the strata above mentioned, below the chalk in the South-East of England, the following are deserving of attention.
Proofs of the formation of stone, in the midst of strata of gravel, sand, and clay, distinctly of mechanical origin. This fact, which is of universal occurrence throughout the series of secondary strata, is especially remarkable in the Lower green and the Hastings sands of Kent and Sussex : sex : the former containing masses of siliceous grit, chert, and chalcedony, and concretions of chert, evidently formed subsequently to the division of the beds which inclose them, yet traversed by the same lines of false stratification which pervade the looser matter :—(22.) and (23.)
The change, in the fossil trees of Portland, of the original woody substance into silex ; and the contrast of their composition with that of the surrounding matter in the “ Dirt-bed", in which fragments of soft limestone are abundant; the strata, both above and below, likewise, consisting principally of carbonate of lime. In the Lower green-sand also, at Woburn, the petrifying petrifying matter of the coniferous wood is silex.
The shells preserved in the green-sands of Kent, consist of carbonate of lime ; but in the sands of Blackdown, though shells occur in still greater numbers, the calcareous matter has almost entirely disappeared, and with very few exceptions has been replaced by chalcedony; and the surrounding sand, instead of effervescing with acids, imbibes them tranquilly.
The occurrence of oolite containing freshwater shells, near the bottom of the Purbeck strata at Combe Wood (144.), p. 275-6, is another fact deserving of notice, and may perhaps explain some doubtful appearances in the uppermost bed of the Portland Series (the Roche); which, although full of marine petrifactions, and commonly oolitic, has very much the aspect of freshwater limestone. It can easily be imagined that the bank, or land, consisting of the Portland strata, when first raised above the sea, was covered with marine remains, which might subsequently have been cemented together, at the bottom of a freshwater lake.
The existence of pisolitic (or granular) oxide of iron, in the Wealden, is probably not confined to the coast near Hastings, where I found it to be generally diffused; p. 166. The fact of its occurrence in this formation is the more deserving of notice, from the great abundance of that ore in the marine deposits supposed to be contemporaneous with our Wealden, in other parts of Europe : supra, (168.) p. 330.
(171.) Similarity of Deposits of different Epochs.—The mineralogical resemblance between some of the strata above and beneath the Wealden, is very remarkable.—The upper part of the Portland formation in the Vale of Wardour is so like chalk, that it bears that name in some of the quarries; and both there and upon the coast of Dorsetshire it contains flint nodules, not distinguishable from those of the chalk.—The Portland sand abounding in green particles, cannot, in itself, be distinguished from the green-sands above the chalk, nor from those below; the green matter in all is of the same nature; the calcareous concretions are like those of the “ Kentishrag”: yet the deposition of these groups was separated by intervals of time sufficient, in the first two cases, for the accumulation of all the Wealden strata, and in the two latter, for that of the chalk.—The strong resemblance of the variegated sands and marl of the Wealden to those of the new red sandstone, and of both to the tea-coloured and variegated marls of the beds above the chalk in the Isle of Wight, has been already mentioned. —The Wealden, again, has many striking points of resemblance to the coal measures. The shale, sandstones, and clay iron-stone of the latter are not distinguishable from those of the Hastings-sands, which are, in fact, a coal formation : and in addition to the Unios and other freshwater shells long- known in the coal formations, the recent discovery of Cypris, in freshwater limestone, among the coal measures in Scotland, is another point of agreement.
These resemblances, of which other examples might easily be given, in deposits separated by great intervals of time, demonstrate the identity of the processes which are still going on with those of the more ancient epochs, and prepare the mind for the reception of other proofs of that continuity of action, which has of late been so ably discussed.
(173.) Fossils.—A systematic list of all the fossils mentioned in the preceding pages is given in the Appendix B: and I have connected with it a series of columns, exhibiting at one view the stratigraphic distribution of the several species. My collection is so incomplete, that many of the columns are unoccupied ; and most of them afford very inadequate representations of the facts : but it will be advantageous to keep in view the completion of such a list, whenever sufficient materials shall be obtained to fill it up. The number of specimens collected from any given district or series of strata, depends on so many circumstances purely accidental,—the texture of the matrix, the number of open quarries, the relative skill and activity of collectors,—that the richest collections can very seldom be regarded as fairly representing the fossil contents of the groups from which they are obtained; and there still are large tracts, in every part of the English series, the fossils of which are unknown. The proportion, therefore, which the species we are acquainted with, bear to the whole number contained in the strata, is so far from being determined, that any general reasoning upon this subject at present would be of little value.
From the imperfect lists of fossils given above, it would seem that even short distances are attended with greater variation in the contents of the strata, than might have been expected ; and that although some species pervade the whole range of the formations in which they are found, others occur in several of the tracts described which have not yet been obtained elsewhere.
I cannot conclude these pages without expressing my great obligation to Mr. Lonsdale, for his kind and unremitting assistance during their passage through the press ; which has been doubly acceptable, from its having been conferred on me by one of my most valued personal friends.
 

D.—ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
Coast west of Hastings.—The alterations and improvements on the coast west of Hastings were so rapid, soon after the preceding pages 163. to 171. were written, that, within a few weeks, an entirely new face of the cliffs was brought to light; a great part of the original surface having been cut away, so as to throw back the vertical section to a much greater distance from the sea, while the debris were employed in raising a quay, by which the shore is now concealed. The Rev. Granville Vernon Harcourt, who had examined the new features thus disclosed, was so good as to point out to me several appearances, which proved that the structure of the shore was not quite so simple as I had supposed it to be, though the sections above described, and that represented in Plate X. b. fig. 3., are in the main correct. Several intermediate though slight derangements occur between the principal fault at the White Rock and the site of the church west of St. Leonard’s; and the whole of the phenomena show that the original stratification hereabouts has been fractured and dislocated throughout, although the disjointed portions are seldom widely separated.
It would be impossible, without the aid of a map on a very large scale, to represent these derangements, nor have they more than a local interest. The place of one of the principal interruptions between the White Rock and Warriors’ Gate is represented in PI. X. b. fig. 3.; and the beds composing the group thus divided, which, on the east of that point, dip slightly towards the sea (or to the west of south), could be detected in several places within (or north of) the Marina at St. Leonard’s, in the sides of the new roads and streets then in progress, inclining, generally, to the north. Their identity could be traced by the aid of two thin beds of greenish Fuller’s earth, frequently concurrent, but sometimes about 4 or 5 feet apart, and separated by about 8 feet of grey sand and sandrock, from a bed of dark grey clay, much charged with portions of lignite, in which indications of vegetable structure were perceptible, but none so distinct as to indicate the species. These beds are all superior to the Endogenite group of the White Rock ; and their distance above that group, on the north-east of St. Leonard’s church, was clearly seen to be nearly the same as at the White Rock. At the roadside, on the east of St. Leonard’s church, I myself found a specimen of Endogenites, at the place mentioned by Mr. Parish from report.
The greater part of the ground formerly above the White Rock had been removed by the operations above mentioned, and the fault there was distinctly uncovered to the extent of several yards. The strata which form the cliff at the brewery descend gradually to the sea, without apparent disturbance, but the ruins of the superior strata, including numerous fragments of the lignite bed, were mixed in great confusion on the western and upper side of the fault; which rising gradually towards the north-east, seemed to cross the valley there separating the cliffs from those of Hastings Castle Hill, in a direction from about south 35° west to the east of north. On that line a wide but not deep fissure, or ravine, could be discerned passing towards the place called Bohemia ; and on the opposite side of the valley, a detached portion of confused matter, including, as at the White Rock, masses of clay iron ore, was visible in a highly inclined position, at the corner of one of the lanes descending from the Castle Rock to the marsh. It is not improbable that the fault may be continued further up the valley on the north-west of Hastings.
Bones of Birds in the IVcalden.—Mr. Manteli, in a short paper read before the Geological Society, June, 18356, has shown by anatomical evidence that the bones found at Tilgate Forest, and suspected to belong to Pterodactyles, were correctly referred to birds. On placing some of tbe questionable fragments before Mr. Owen, of the College of Surgeons, that gentleman found, in a tarso-metatarsal bone, tbe articular surface and place of attachment of the posterior, or opposite toe, distinctly indicated; and on a comparison of these fragments with the foot of a recent Ardea, no doubt remained as to the similarity of their structure. This short paper beautifully illustrates the bearing of exact comparative anatomy upon Geology.
Supposed JVealden in Northamptonshire.—Mr. Lonsdale having, during the last summer, resumed his examination of the oolitic system, and followed out the series from the north of Oxfordshire to the Humber, informs me, that he did not observe any traces of ihe Wealden in the vicinity of Wansford ; which is mentioned at p. 309 as the place where a beautiful specimen of Lonchopteris Mantellii was supposed to have been found. The tract belongs to the great oolite, which is the highest formation, and is extensively quarried in every direction around Wansford : on the west of Peterborough, the highest formation is the cornbrash. Mr. Lonsdale, therefore, thinks that the occurrence of any portion of the Wealden group in such a situation, is extremely improbable, and that the specimen above referred to may have been ascribed to that place by mistake.
Supposed Chalk in Rutlandshire.—The existence of Chalk, in situ, at Ridlington, in Rutlandshire, Mr. Lonsdale considers also as being very improbable. The village stands on the ferruginous sand of the inferior oolite; about half a mile west of it, is a small pit of the bottom beds of the great oolite, now a subsided mass : and great oolite is quarried near Brooke Hall, two miles north of Ridlington; but with the exception first mentioned, there is no trace of any stratum superior to the inferior oolite, in the immediate neighbourhood of that village.
Inoceramus intermedius.—This fossil, which is mentioned at p. 317, as from Hunstanton cliff in West Norfolk, is a new species, ascertained by Mr. Sowerby; by whom a drawing of it was made, for a Wood-cut, published in Loudon’s “ Magazine of Natural History,” for 1829, vol. ii. p. 296. Mr. Sowerby informs me that its occurrence is not unfrequent in the flinty chalk of Norfolk and Kent; and that it is found occasionally, in flint, in the gravel around London.









