The observations which we have ventured to offer in the former volume, relate to what may be termed the Motive, the Sentient, the Nutritive, and reproductive Functions of Animals. The various Organs of the animal frame have been described, their actions investigated, and the important purposes of life, to which they are subservient, have at the same time been pointed out. An equally extensive field of Zoological Science remains to be investigated. 

Animals are related to one another, and to the objects which surround them, in such a manner, as to be dependent on a variety of circumstances for the preservation of their existence, their dispersion over the globe, and their power of accommodation to the changes of the seasons. They are likewise to be viewed as admitting of division into classes and subordinate groups, according to the external or internal characters which they exhibit. In the investigation of these characters, a variety of methods are employed, and many rules have been prescribed, to regulate the principles of zoological nomenclature. 

In order to enter more fully into these important subjects, we shall distribute the present volume into Four Farts. In the first, we shall consider the Condition of Animals in reference to their Duration, Distribution, and Economical Uses. In the second, we shall treat of the Methods of Investigation employed to ascertain their structure and actions. In the third, we shall examine the Rules of Nomenclature ; while the fourth will embrace a General View of the Classification of the Objects of the Animal Kingdom. 
Each species of Animal is destined, in the absence of disease and accidents, to enjoy existence during a particular period. In no species, however, is this term absolutely limited, as we find some individuals outliving others, by a considerable fraction of their whole life. In order to find the ordinary duration of life of any species, therefore, we must take the average of the lives of a number of individuals, and rest satisfied with the approximation to truth which can thus be obtained. 

There is but little resemblance, in respect of longevity, between the different classes, or even species of animals. There is no peculiar structure, by which long-lived species may be distinguished from those which are short-lived. Many species, whose structure is complicated, live but for a few years, as the rabbit, while some of the testaceous mollusca, with more simple organization, have a more extended existence. If longevity is not influenced by structure, neither is it modified by the size of the species. While the horse, greatly larger than the dog, lives to twice its age, man enjoys an existence three times longer than the former. 

The circumstances which regulate the term of existence in different species, exhibit so many peculiarities, corresponding to each, that it is difficult to offer any general observations on the subject. Health is precarious, and the origin of diseases generally involved in obscurity. The condition of the organs of respiration and digestion, however, appears so intimately connected with the comfortable continuance of life, and the attainment of old age, that existence may be said to depend on the due exercise of the functions which they perform. 

Whether animals have their blood aerated by means of lungs or gills, they require a regular supply of oxygen gas. But as this gas is extensively consumed in the processes of combustion, putrefaction, vegetation and respiration, there is occasionally a deficiency in particular places for the supply of animal life. But, in general, where there is a deficiency of oxygen, there is also a quantity of carbonic acid or carburetted hydrogen present. These gases not only injure the system by occupying the place of the oxygen which is required, but exercise on many species a deleterious influence. To these circumstances may be referred the difficulty of preserving many fishes and aquatic rollusca in glass jars or small ponds ; as a great deal of the oxygen in the air contained in the water, is necessarily consumed by the germination and growth of the aquatic cryptogamia, and the respiration of the infusory animalcula. In all cases, when the air of the atmosphere, or that which the water contains, is impregnated with noxious particles, many individuals of a particular species, living in the same district, suffer at the same time. The disease which is thus at first endemic or local, may, by being contagious, extend its ravages to other districts. 

The endemical and epidemical diseases which attack horses, sheep and cows, obtain in this country the name of murrahi, sometimes also the distemper. The general term, however, for the pestilential diseases with which these and other animals are infected is Epizooty, (from in upon, and on an animal. 

The ravages which have been committed among the domesticated animals, at various times, in Europe, by epizootics, have been detailed by a variety of authors. Horses, sheep, cows, swine, poultry, fish, have all been subject to such attacks ; and it has frequently happened, that the circumstances which have produced the disease in one species have likewise exercised a similar in- 
fluence over others. 

That these diseases arise from the deranged functions of the respiratory organs, is rendered probable by the circumstance, that numerous individuals, and even species, are affected at the same time ; and this opinion is strengthened, when the rapidity with which they spread is taken into consideration. 

Many diseases, which greatly contribute to shorten life take their rise from circumstances connected with the organs of digestion. Noxious food is frequently consumed by mistake, particularly by domesticated animals. When cows, which have been confined to the house, during the winter season, and fed with straw, are turned out to the pastures in the spring, they eat indiscriminately every green plant presented to them, and frequently fall victims to their imprudence. It is otherwise with animals in a wild state, whose instincts guard them from the common noxious substances of their ordinary situation. 

The shortening of life, in consequence of the derangement of the digestive organs, is chiefly produced by a scarcity of food. When the supply is not sufficient to nourish the body, it becomes lean, the fat being absorbed to supply the deficiency, — feebleness is speedily exhibited, — the cutaneous and intestinal animals rapidly multiply, and, in conjunction, accelerate the downfall of the system. 

The power of fasting, or of surviving without food, possessed by some animals, is astonishingly great. An eagle has been known to live without food five weeks, — a badger a month,— a dog thirty-six days, — a toad fourteen months, and a beetle three years. This power of outliving scarcity for a time, is of signal use to many animals, whose food cannot be readily obtained ; as is the case with beasts of prey, and rapacious birds. But this faculty does not belong to such exclusively. Wild pigeons have survived twelve days, an antelope twenty days, and a land tortoise eighteen months. Such fasting, however, is detrimental to the system, and can only be considered as one of those singular resources which may be employed in cases where, without it, life would speedily be extinguished. 

In situations where animals are deprived of their accustomed food, they frequently avoid the effects of starvation, by devouring substances to which their digestive organs are not adapted. Pigeons can be brought to feed on flesh, and hawks on bread. Sheep, when covered with snow, have been known to eat the wool off each other's backs. 

The various diseases to which animals are subject, tend greatly to shorten the period of their existence. With the methods of cure employed by different species, we are but little acquainted. Few accurate observations appear to have been made on the subject. Dogs frequently effect a cure of their sores, by licking them. They eat grass to excite vomiting ; and probably to cleanse then- intestines from obstructions, or worms, by its mechanical effects. Many land animals promote their health by bathing, others by rolling themselves in the dust. By the last operation, they probably get rid of the parasitical insects with which they are infected. 

But independent of scarcity, or disease, comparatively few animals live to the ordinary term of natural death. There is a wasteful war everywhere raging in the animal kingdom. Tribe is divided against tribe, and species against species, and neutrality is nowhere respected. Those which are preyed upon, have certain means which they employ to avoid the foe ; but the rapacious are likewise qualified for the pursuit. The exercise of the feelings of benevolence may induce us to confine our attention to the former, and adore that goodness which gives shelter to the defenceless, and protection to the weak, while we may be disposed to turn, precipitately, from viewing the latter ; lest we discover marks of cruelty, where we wished to contemplate nothing but kindness. These feelings are usually the companions of circumscribed and partial observation, and fall far short of the object at which they aim. 
It would be impious in us to inquire why the waster has been created to destroy. It is enough if we know that rapacious animals occupy a station in the scale of being. And, while we eagerly explore the various methods employed by the defenceless, to secure themselves from danger, and evade the threatened death ; it is suitable for us likewise to contemplate the various means employed by carnivorous animals to gain the means of their subsistence. When we see a hawk in pursuit of a lark, we are apt to admire exclusively, the dexterity of the latter in avoiding destruction, and to triumph when it has obtained the requisite protection in a thicket. 
We seem to forget that the digestive organs of the hawk are fitted only for carrion ; and we lose sight of the benevolence and wisdom exhibited, in giving to its wings a power of inflicting a deadly blow, and rendering the claws suited for grasping, and the bill for tearing in pieces the quarry. 
We are not therefore to take confined views of the animal kingdom, if we wish to read the lessons concerning the Providence of God which it teaches. He that causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man ; likewise giveth meat in due season to the young lions which roar after their prey ; and feedeth the ravens, though they neither sow nor reap. We see rapacious and defenceless animals existing, yet we do not observe the former successful in extirpating the latter. Limits are assigned to the ravages of this universal war. The excess only of the population is cut off, — and this excess, on whose production so many animals depend for subsistence, is as uniform as the means used to restrain its limits. 

These various circumstances which we have now enumerated as limiting the duration of animals, preserve the balance of life, restrain within suitable bounds the numbers of the individuals of a species, and give stability to that system, the wise arrangements of which can only be discovered by a close examination of the whole. 


In examining the zoological productions of different countries, we observe, that the species which are commonly met with in one district, are rare, or not to be detected, in the others. If we confine our attention to any one species, we shall observe, that there is some particular country where the individuals are most numerous, and where the energies of life are exerted with the greatest activity we recede from this district, the individuals become less numerous, their increase goes on at a slower rate, and those which axe produced are rather of dwarfish stature : at length, we reach the limits beyond which they do not extend. The geographical distribution of each species, therefore, may be represented by a circle, towards the centre of which, existence can be comfortably maintained ; but as we approach the circumference, restraints multiply, and life at last becomes impracticable. Each species has a range peculiar to itself, so that the circles of different species intersect one another in every possible relation. 

The extent of the earth's surface over which the individuals of a species are dispersed, can only be ascertained after a long series of observations, conducted by naturalists in different countries. Hitherto the geographical limits of but few species have been satisfactorily determined. These chiefly belong to the larger species of quadrupeds, as the African and Asiatic elephants, the ass and the quagga, the lion, hippopotamus, and polar bear. In the tribes of the less perfect animals, the species of which have been investigated by few, the extent of their geographical distribution has been very imperfectly determined. 
Before proceeding to the examination of the laws which regulate the geographical distribution of any one species, it is expedient that we previously make ourselves acquainted with the range of country it inhabits, the situations in which it has been observed, and the peculiar characters it exhibits in these different situations. But while this minute and varied information is requisite for the purpose of investigating fully the physical history of any one species, it is enough, for ordinary investigations, that we ascertain those districts and situations where the individuals are most healthy and most prolific, and those where they do not exist. By comparing the physical circumstances of the former  with those of the latter, it will be no difficult matter to discover those conditions which promote the vigour of life in the one, and restrain or destroy its energies in the other. What, then, are those conditions which limit the geographical distribution of species ? They appear to be limited to circumstances connected with Temperature, Food, Situation, and Foes. 

I. Temperature. 

We have already stated, that the degree of heat at the equatorial regions appears to be most favourable for the increase of living beings, and that they diminish in numbers as we approach the poles. There is no latitude, however, which the perseverance of man has yet reached, where living beings have not been observed. The icy shores of the arctic regions are peopled as well as the arid plains or shaded forests of tropical climates. When, however, an inhabitant of the colder regions is transported to a warmer district, the increased temperature is painful, the functions become deranged, and disease and death ensue. The inhabitants of the warmer regions, when transported to the colder districts, experience inconvenience from the change of temperature, equally hurtful to the system, and fatal to its continuance. The polar bear appears to be accommodated to live in a region, whose mean annual temperature is below the freezing point. In the summer temperature of 
Edinburgh, however well supplied with food, he appears to languish in misery. Cold spring-water poured upon him seems to revive him for a little ; but all relief is temporary, the climate is too hot for the enjoyment of life. Destined to live in a climate where the system is required to secrete heat chiefly, it seems incapable of generating the cold requisite to counteract the effects of even a temperate climate. 
The inhabitants of the torrid regions, on the other hand, seem capable of generating cold chiefly, all their organs being adapted for resisting high temperatures ; and hence, when brought to cold districts, they are incapable of generating the requisite degree of heat. 

In those districts where the individuals of a species are most vigorous and prolific, the temperature most suitable for existence prevails. The native country of the horse is probably Arabia. There he exists in a wild state in the greatest numbers. In the Zetland Islands, where he is nearly in a state of nature, he is approaching the polar limits of his distribution. He has become a dwarf. He does not reach maturity until his fourth year, seldom continues in vigour beyond his twelfth, and the female is never pregnant above once in two years. At the line where the energies of the horse terminate, however, the reindeer becomes a useful substitute. Its equatorial limits do not reach the shores of the Baltic. 

The variations of the seasons, which bring along with them corresponding changes of heat and cold, exercise a powerful influence on the distribution of animals, in reference to temperature. Some species appear to possess a considerable range of temperature, within which life can be easily preserved, and all its functions regularly performed. 
We do not mean to intimate, that there is any animal which can live in our climate, for example, and remain uninfluenced by a difference of temperature of upwards of twenty degrees between summer and winter. The constitutional arrangement suited to the one season, would be prejudicial during the continuance of the other. But there are many animals which live in the same district both in summer and winter, and even in districts differing considerably in their mean annual temperature. What, then, are the means employed by these species to preserve life in the midst of such vicissitudes ? The power of producing heat or cold, is a property obviously possessed by the warm-blooded animals, and probably in an inferior degree by those which are termed cold-blooded. But in all the efforts made by the system to secrete extraordinary degrees of either heat or cold, there is so great a portion of vital energy expended, that exhaustion and death follow its long continuance. In all cases where the influence of the seasons are to be resisted by efforts of this kind, it would be requisite to continue them uninterrupted for many months. These efforts, however, are diminished in extent and duration by a variety of the most wonderful arrangements, exhibiting the infinite resources of that Wisdom which planned the constitution and continuance of the animal kingdom. To the chief of these compensating or counteracting circumstances we shall now briefly advert. 

1. Changes take place in the Quantity of the Clothing. — 
The same circumstances which enable the Negro to go about in a state approaching to nakedness, and impel the inhabitants of the arctic regions to cover themselves with woollen cloth or skins, operate in regidating the clothing of quadrupeds and birds. In the warmer regions, it is requisite to suffer the temperature of the Body to be diminished, while, in the colder regions, the very opposite object is aimed at. 
In the former case, the hair or feathers are thinly spread over the body, while, in the latter, they form a close and continuous covering. In the dogs of Guinea, and in the African and Indian sheep, the fur is so very thin that they may almost be denominated naked. In the Siberian dog and Iceland sheep, on the other hand, the body is protected by a thicker and longer covering. 

The clothing of animals, living in cold countries, is not only different from that of the animals of warm regions in its quantity, but in its arrangement. If we examine the covering of swine of warm countries, we find it consisting of bristles or hair of the same form and texture ; while the same animals which live in colder districts, possess not only common bristles or strong hair, but a fine frizzled wool next the skin, over which the long hairs project. Between the swine of the south of England, and the Scottish Highlands, such differences may be observed. Similar appearances present themselves among the sheep of warm and cold countries. The fleece of those of England consists entirely of wool ; while the sheep of Zetland and Iceland possess a fleece, containing, besides the wool, a number of long hairs, which give to it, when on the back of the animal, the appearance of being very coarse. The living races of Rhinoceros and Elephant, inhabitants of the warm regions 
have scarcely any hair upon their bodies ; while those which formerly lived in the northern plains of Europe, the entire carcases of which have been preserved in the ice in Siberia, were covered with fur similar to the Icelandic Sheep, consisting of a thick covering of short frizzled wool, protected by long coarse hairs. These species, now extinct, possessed clothing suiting them for the climate where they lived, and where they became at last enveloped in ice. 
Had they been transported by any accident from a warmer region, they would have exhibited in the thinness of their covering, unequivocal marks of the climate in which they were reared. 

By means of this arrangement, in reference to the quantity of clothing, individuals of the same species can maintain life, comfortably, in climates which differ considerably in their average annual temperature. By the same arrangements, the individuals residing in a particular district, are able to provide against the varying temperature of the seasons. The covering is diminished during summer and increased in winter, as may be witnessed in many of our domestic quadrupeds. 

Previous to winter, the hair is increased in quantity and length. This increase bears a constant ratio to the temperature ; so that when the temperature decreases with the elevation, we find the cattle and horses, living on farms near the level of the sea, covered with a shorter and thinner fur than those which inhabit districts of a higher level. 
Cattle and horses, housed during the winter, have shorter and thinner hair than those which live constantly in the open air. The hair is likewise shorter and thinner in a mild, than during a severe winter. 

This winter covering, if continued during the summer, would prove inconveniently warm. It is, therefore, thrown off by degrees as the summer advances ; so that the animals which were shaggy during the cold months become sleek in the hot season. 

This process of casting the hair takes place at different seasons, according to the constitution of the animal with respect to heat. The mole has, in general, finished this operation before the end of May. The fleece of the sheep, when suffered to fall, is seldom cast before the end of June. 
In the northern islands of Scotland, where the shears are never used, the inhabitants watch the time when the fleece is ready to fall, and pull it off with their fingers. The long hairs, which likewise form a part of the covering, remain for several weeks, as they are not ripe for casting at the same time with the line wool. This operation of pulling off the wool is represented by some writers, more humane than well-informed, as a painful process to the animal. That it is not even disagreeable, is evident from the quiet manner in which the sheep lie during the pulling, and from the ease with which the fleece separates from the skin. 

We are in general inattentive with respect to the annual changes in the clothing of our domestic animals ; but when in search of those beasts which yield us our most valuable service we are compelled to watch these operations of the seasons. During the summer months the fur is thin and short, and is scarcely ever an object of pursuit ; while during the winter, it possesses in perfection all its valuable qualities. When the beginning of winter is remarkable for its mildness, the fur is longer in ripening, as the animal stands in no need of the additional quantity for a covering ; but as soon as the rigours of the season commence, the fleece speedily increases the quantity and length of bair. 
This increase is sometimes very rapid in the hare and the rabbit, the skins of which are seldom ripe in the fur until there is a fall of snow, or a few days of frosty weather ; the growth of hair in such instances being dependent on the temperature of the atmosphere. 

The moulting of birds is another preparation for winter, which is analogous to the casting of the hair in quadrupeds. During summer, the feathers of birds are exposed to many accidents. Not a few spontaneously fall ; some of them are torn off during their amorous quarrels ; others are broken or damaged ; while in many species they are pulled from their bodies to line their nests. Hence their summer dress become thin and suitable. Previous to winter, however, and immediately after the process of incubation and rearing of the young is finished, the old feathers are pushed oft' in succession by the new ones, and in this manner the greater part of the plumage of the bird is renewed. During this process of moulting, the bird seems much enfeebled, and, if previously in a weak state, is in danger of dying during the process. In consequence of this renewal of the feathers, the winter covering is rendered perfect, and the birds prepared for withstanding all the rigours of the season. In those birds whose plumage changes colour with the seasons, the moulting takes place in subserviency to the purposes of these variations, as we shall shortly have occasion to notice. 

By this addition to the non-conducting appendices of the skin, quadrupeds and birds are enabled to preserve the heat generated in their bodies, from being readily transmitted to the surrounding air, and carried off by its motions and diminished temperature. But along with a change of quantity, there is frequently also a change of colour. 

2. Changes take place in the Colour of the Clothing:—' 
The distribution of colour in the animal kingdom, appears to be connected with latitude 'as correlative with temperature. In the warmer districts of the earth, the colours of man, quadrupeds and birds, exhibit greater variety, and are deeper and brighter, than in the natives of colder countries. 

Among the inhabitants of the temperate and cold regions there are many species which, in reference to the colour of their dress, do not appear to be influenced by the vicissitudes of the seasons. In others, a very marked difference prevails between the colour of their summer and winter garb. A few of the more obvious instances of these changes, in British species, may be here produced. 

Among quadrupeds, the Alpine hare {Lepiis variabilis) is a very remarkable example. It is found, in this country, on the high mountains of the Grampian range. Its summer dress is of a tawny grey colour ; but, about the month of September, its fur gradually changes to a snowy whiteness. It continues in this state during the winter, and resumes its plainer covering again in the month of April or May, according to the season. The ermine is another of our native quadrupeds which exhibits in its dress similar changes of colour according to the season. It frequents the outskirts of woods and thickets. During the summer months, its hair is of a pale reddish brown colour ; in harvest it becomes clouded with pale yellow ; and, in the month of November, with us, it is of a snow white colour Its winter dress furnishes the valuable fur called ermine. 
Early in spring, the white becomes freckled with brown, and in the month of May it completely resumes its summer garb. 

Among the feathered tribes such instances of change of colour in the plumage during winter are numerous. They greatly perplex the ornithologist, and have been the means of introducing into the system several spurious species. 
The white grous or ptarmigan (Tefrao lagopus) may be produced as a familiar example of this kind of hibernation. 
This bird, like the Alpine hare, inhabits the higher Grampians, and is never found at a great distance from the limits of the snow. In summer its plumage is of an ash colour, mottled with small dusky spots and bars. At the approach of winter the dark colours disappear, and its feathers are 
then found to be pure white. In remarkably mild winters the change is sometimes incomplete, a few dusky spots of the summer dress remaining. In spring its winter garb becomes again mottled, and the bird loses much of its beauty. Even the young birds in their autumnal dress resemble their parents in the mottled plumage, which likewise becomes white at the approach of winter. 

Among the aquatic birds, similar changes in the colour of the plumage have been observed. The black guillemot (Uria grylle), so common on our coasts, is of a sooty black colour during the summer, with a white patch on the wings. 
During winter, however, the black colour disappears, and its plumage is then clouded with ash-coloured spots on a white ground. In the winter dress it has been described by some as a distinct species, under the name of the spotted guillemot. In the more northern regions, as in Greenland, for example, this bird, in winter, becomes of a pure white colour. 
These changes of colour, which we have already mentioned, extend throughout the whole plumage of the bird ; but, in some instances, the change takes place on a small part only of the plumage. Thus the little auk {Aka alle), during summer, has its cheeks and throat of a black colour, but in winter these parts become of a dirty white. In this its winter garb, it is often shot on our coasts. Its summer dress induced Pennant to consider it as a variety, and as such to give a figure of it in his British Zoology. 
The black-headed gull {Larus rid'ibunchis) has a black head during summer, as its English name intimates. During the winter, however, the black colour on the head disappears; and, when in this dress, it has been regarded by many as a distinct species, under the name of the Red-legged Gidl. 

In many other birds there is a remarkable difference, in point of colour, between the summer and the winter plumage, although not so striking as in those which we have already noticed. The colours of the summer feathers are rich and vivid ; those of the winter obscure and dull. This is well illustrated in the dunlin {Tr'inga alpina), whose summer plumage is much intermixed with black and rufous colour, but whose winter plumage is dull and cinereous. In its winter dress it has been described as a distinct species, under the name of T. cinclus, or Purre. Similar instances might be produced in the wagtails, linnets, and plovers, and a great many other birds. 

The circumstances under which these changes are observed to take place, indicate their dependence on temperature, as connected with the season. The deep colours of the summer dress are exchanged for the lighter or whiter colours of the winter, with a rapidity and extent proportional to the chanoes of the seasons. During; a mild autumn, the shifting of the dark for the light coloured dress proceeds at a very slow pace ; and when the winter also continues mild, the white dress is never fully assumed. In some species, as the black guillemot, the white winter dress is never acquired in this climate, although its ash-coloured plumage intimates a tendency to the change. In the climate of Greenland, on the other hand, the change is complete, and the plumage is of a snowy whiteness ; as we had an opportunity of observing in the collection of the Dublin Society in 1816, in a specimen in its winter dress, brought from Greenland by an intelligent and enterprising naturalist, Sir Charles Giesecke. 

Having thus seen that the colour of the clothing of many animals changes with the season, and that, however diversified the summer dress may be, the colour during winter approaches to white, it may now be asked. What benefit is derived from this arrangement? 

The rate at which bodies cool is greatly influenced by their colour. The surface which reflects heat most readily, suffers it to escape but slowly by radiation. Reflection takes place most readily in objects of a white colour, and from such, consequently, heat will radiate with difficulty. If we suppose two animals, the one of a black colour, and the other white, placed in a higher temperature than that of their own body, the heat will enter the one that is black with the greatest rapidity, and elevate its temperature considerably above the other. These differences are observable in wearing black and white coloured clothes during a hot day. When, on the other hand, these animals are placed in a situation, the temperature of which is considerably lower than their own, the black animal will give out its heat by radiation to every surrounding object colder than itself, and speedily have its temperature reduced; while the white animal will part with its heat by radiation at a much slower rate. The change of colour in the dress of animals is therefore suited to regulate their temperature by the radiation or absorption of caloric. 

While it is requisite that the temperature of some species should be preserved as equably as possible, the cooling effects of winter are likewise resisted by an additional quantity of heat being generated by the system. An increase in the quantity of clothing takes place to prevent that heat being dissipated by communication with the cold objects around, and the dress changes to a white colour, to prevent its loss by radiation. In summer, the pernicious increase of temperature is prevented by a diminished secretion of heat or the secretion of cold, increased perspiration, the casting of a portion of the winter covering, and by a superior intensity of colour in the remainder giving it a greater radiating power. This last character would, in the sunshine, by absorbing heat, prove a source of great inconvenience, were its effects not counterbalanced by other 
arrangements, and by the opportunity of frequenting the refreshing shade, or bathing in the stream. 

In those cases, where particular parts only of the clothing change their colour, there are probably local circumstances connected with the secretions, or the sexual system, which render such arrangements necessary. Hair growing from a part which has been wounded, is always paler coloured than that which is produced on the sounder parts, intimating the operation of local causes on the colouring secretions, or local purposes to be served by the change. 

It is probably for the purpose of preventing a wasteful dissipation of the heat of the system, that the dress of many animals becomes lighter coloured in old age, and that the human hair turns grey. Young animals seldom present the same dress and vivid colours, &c. which they assume upon arriving at maturity.
The change of colour which takes place in the dress of some animals during winter, is supposed to serve other purposes than the regulation of their temperature. The white garb which they assume, assimilates them to the colour of the snow, and in this way they are considered as better able to escape the observation of their foes. 

All our conclusions concerning final causes, ought to be the result of very extended observations, lest we delineate arrangements which would be productive of pain and ruin to many species, where we intended to unfold the marks of wisdom and benevolence. If the white dress of the alpine hare and ptarmigan concealed them from their enemies, the eagle, the cat, and the fox, these last, by being deprived of their ordinary food, would be in danger of starvation and death. But this variation of colour is not confined to weak or defenceless animals. Beasts and birds of prey are likewise subject to the change. Hence, if it yielded protection to some, it would enable others to prey with greater certainty of success on their defenceless neighbours. Many of these rapacious animals, (as the ermine for example, which is at all times well qualified to provide for its wants by its determined boldness, extreme agility, and extreme smell), do not stand in need of such, assistance. If this change extends to the rapacious as well as the defenceless, it may likewise be observed in aquatic as well as in terrestrial animals. In reference to acquatic animals, we would ask, What protection is afforded to the black guillemot, during the winter, by its mottled plumage, or to the little auk, by its white chin, since the whiter their dress, so much the more unlike the dark coloured water of the clouded season in which it is exhibited ? The popular opinion on the subject must be relinquished as untenable ; especially as the change of colour from dark to white does not vary, however different the habits or even stations of the animals may be in which it takes place. 

An interesting inquiry yet remains to be made regarding the manner in which this change in the colour of the dress is effected. The attention of naturalists has, of late years, been directed to this subject, and several important observations have been made, equally interesting to the physiological and systematical zoologist. ; From the belief which is generally entertained, that in hair and feadiers there is no circulation, neither secretion nor absorption, a conviction arose in the minds of 
many naturalists, that the change of colour which takes place in the dress of some animals according to the season, was not the effect of any organical change in the hair or feathers, but accompanied a renewal of the whole. The late George Montagu, Esquire, who had long attended to the characters and habits of the feathered tribes, delivers his opinion on this subject in the following terms : " Some species of birds seem to change their winter and summer feathers, or at least in part ; in some, this is performed by moulting twice a- year, as in the ptarmigan, in others, only additional feathers are thrown out. But we have no conception of the feathers changing colour, although we have been informed of such happening in the course of one night." Staggered with the statements of such a frequent renewal of the dress of animals, accompanied by such a wasteful expenditure of vital energy, and guided by multiplied observations, we ventured to offer the following remarks on the subject in the Edinburgh Encyclopedia, under the article " Hybernation,'" vol. xi. p. 387, published in 1817. 
It has been supposed by some, that those quadrupeds which, like the alpine hare and ermine, become white in winter, cast their hair twice in the course of the year ; at harvest when they part with their summer dress, and in spring when they throw off their winter fur. This opinion does not appear to be supported by any direct observations, nor is it countenanced by any analogical reasonings. If we attend to the mode in which the hair on the human head becomes grey as we advance in years, it will not be difficult to perceive that the change is not produced by the growth of new hair of a white colour, but by a change in the colour of the old hair. Hence there will be found some hairs pale towards the middle, and white towards the extremity, while the base is of a dark colour. Now, in ordinary cases, the hair of the human head, unlike that of several of the inferior animals, is always dark at the base, and still continues so during the change to grey ; hence we are disposed to conclude from analogy, that the change of colour, in those animals which become white in winter, is effected, not by a renewal of the hair, but by a change in the colour of die secretions of the rete mucosum, by which the hair is nourished, or perhaps by that secretion of the 
colouring matter being diminislied, or totally suspended. 

" But as analogy is a dangerous instrument of investigation in those departments of knowledge which ultimately rest on experiment or observation, so we are not disposed to lay much stress on the preceding argument which it has furnished. The appearances exhibited by a specimen of the ermine now before us are more satisfactory and convincing. 
It was shot on the 9th May (1814), in a garb intermediate between its winter and summer dress. In the belly, and all the under parts, the white colour had nearly disappeared, in exchange for the primrose-yellow, the ordinary tinge of these parts in summer. The upper parts had not fully acquired their ordinary summer colour, which is a deep yellowish-brown. There were still several white spots, and not a few with a tinge of yellow. Upon examining those white and yellow spots, not a trace of interspersed new short brown hair could be decerned. This would certainly not liave been the case if the change of colour is effected by a change of fur. Besides, while some parts of the fur on the back had acquired their proper colour, even in those parts numerous hairs could be observed of a wax-yellow, and in i^l the intermediate stages from yellowish-brown, through yellow, to white. 

" These observations leave little room to doubt, that the change of colour takes place in the old hair, and that the change from white to brown passes through yellow. ' If this conclusion is not admitted, then we must suppose that this animal casts its hair at least seven times in the year. 
In spring, it must produce primrose-yellow hair ; then hair of a wax-yellow ; and, lastly, of a yellowish-brown. The same process must be gone through in autumn, only reversed, and with the addition of a suit of white. The absurdity of this supposition is too apparent to be farther exposed. 

" With respect to the opinion which we have advanced, it seems to be attended with few difficulties. We urge not in support of it, the accounts which have been published of the human hair changing its colour during the course of a single night ; but we think the particular observations on the ermine warrant us in believing, that the change of colour in the alpine hair is effected by a similar process. But how is the change accomplished in birds ? 

" The young ptarmigans are mottled in their first plumage similar to their parents. They become white in winter, and again mottled in spring. These young birds, provided the change of colour is effected by moulting, must produce three different coverings of feathers in the course of ten months. This is a waste of vital energy, which we do not suppose any bird in its wild state capable of sustaining ; as moulting is the most debilitating process which they undergo. In other birds of full age, two moultings must be necessary. In these changes, the range of colour is from blackish grey through grey to white, an arrangement so nearly resembling that which prevails in the ermine, that we are disposed to consider the change of colour to take place in the old feathers, and not by the growth of new plumage ; this change of colour being independent of the ordinary annual moultings of the birds. 

" Independent of the support from analogy which the ermine furnishes, we may observe, that the colours of other parts of a bird vary according to the season. This is frequently observable in the feet, legs, and bill. Now, since a change takes place in the colouring secretions of these organs, What prevents us from supposing that similar changes take place in the feathers ? But even in the case of birds, we have before us an example as convincing as the ermine already mentioned. It is a specimen of the little auk (Jlca alle), which was shot in Zetland in the end of February 1810. The chin is still in its winter dress of white, but the feathers on the lower part of the throat have assumed a dusky hue. Both the shafts and webs have become of a blackish grey colour at the base and in the centre, while the extremities of both still continue white. The change from black to Avhite is here effected by passing through grey. If we suppose that in this bird the changes of the colour of the plumage are accomplished by moulting, or a change of feathers, we must admit the existence of three such moultings in the course of the year — one by which the white winter dress is produced, another for the dusky spring dress, and a third for the black garb of summer. It is surely unnecessary to point out any other examples in support of our opinion on this subject. We have followed nature, and our conclusions appear to be justified by the appearances which we have described." 

The total absence of every thing like demonstration of the truth of the assertion regarding the autumnal change of the colour of the plumage of the grouse, and the language of hesitation which he employed when speaking of the changes observed to take place in spring, probably induced those naturalists who had perused Cartwright's work, to reject statements so opposite to the opinions generally entertained on the subject. The conjecture that all the white feathers drop off in spring, even those which were produced in the previous autumn, to be succeeded by coloured ones, has not been verified by any observations which we have been able to make on the subject. 

The moulting of birds takes place in all cases gradually, and in those species whose plumage changes colour with the reason, the different moultings take place at corresponding periods. In the autumn, we find that the black feathers on the head of the Lams ridibundus change to a white colour. But besides the altered feathers, others spring up, of a white colour, to increase the quantity of clothing. This gull has, therefore, during the winter, some of the feathers of the head old, and others young. 
Again, in spring the white feathers of the winter become black, and a few new feathers make their appearance, likewise of a black colour, to supply the place of the older ones which drop off in succession. Some of the feathers on the head of this gull are half a year older than others ; and consequently, we may infer, will fall off sooner than those of more recent growth. From these, and similar facts, furnished by several species of British birds, we are disposed to conclude, that the feathers which are produced in autumn and the beginning of winter, and which correspond with the conditions of the season, change their colour in spring, and continue in this state until they are shed in autumn. The feathers which are produced in spring, continue of the same hue during the summer, change their colour in winter, and fall off again s upon the approach of spring. In this manner, the quantity of the plumage fit for the different seasons of the year is easily regulated, and it is only necessary that the change of colour in each feather should take place but once in the course of its connection with the bird. By these arrangements, the welfare of the individual is promoted by the simplest means. 

Many animals, which are unable to provide against the vicissitudes of the seasons, by varying the quantity and the colour of their dress, are, nevertheless, protected by being able to shift their quarters, so as to live throughout the whole year in a temperature congenial to their constitution. 

3. Periodical Migration. — Quadrupeds in general, from their limited power of locomotion, cannot migrate from one country to another, with ease and safety, in order to avoid the variations of temperature which accompany the changes of the seasons. In the same country partial migrations may take place, as we witness in the stag and the roe, which leave the alpine regions at the approach of winter, and seek protection in the more sheltered plains. In America some species of the genus Dijpus perform still more extensive migrations. Those quadrupeds, however, which have the faculty of flying, as the bats, or of swimming, as the seals and whales, may overcome tlie obstacles which oppose a change of 'place, and execute safely periodical migrations. 
Individuals of these tribes are accordingly observed to avoid the extremes of heat and cold, by shifting their situations according to the seasons. The great bat {Vespertilio nodtda), which inhabits England during the summer, is known to spend its winters in a torpid state in Italy. The Greenland seal forsakes the icy shores which it has frequented during summer, and migrates southwards, at the approach of winter, to Iceland. 

The facts which have been ascertained in reference to the periodical migration of quadrupeds, are too few for enabling us to point out the laws by which they are regulated. The movements of birds, however, furnish more interesting results. 

The migrations of the feathered tribes have been the object of popular observation, since the days of the prophet Jeremiah.
The systematical naturalists have likewise collected many scattered observations, and the subject appears now to be capable of receiving a satisfactory illustration. It is not our intention to enter into any minuteness of detail, regarding the migrations of particular species, but to ascertain the laws of migration, and the circumstances under which it takes place. 

Before entering farther upon the subject, it may be proper to state, that the same species which is migratory in one country, is in some cases stationary in another; as the linnet, which is migratory in Greenland, but stationary in Britain. In Britain, both male and female chaffinches are stationary, while in Sweden, the latter are migratory. 
Some species of the same natural genus are migratory, while others are stationary. Thus the fieldfare is migratory, while the blackbird is permanently resident. 

Migrating birds may be divided into two classes, from the different seasons of the year in which they arrive or depart. To the first class will belong those birds which arrive in this country in the spring, and depart from it in autumn, and are termed Summer Birds of Passage. The second will include those which arrive in autumn, and depart in spring, and are called Winter Birds of Passage. 

The Summer Birds of Passage are not confined to any particular order or tribe ; nor are they distinguished by similarity of habits. Some of them belong to the division of Water Fowls, as the terns and gulls ; while others are Land Birds, as the swallow and corn-crake. They differ also remarkably with regard to their food. Thus, the hobby is carnivorous ; the gulls and terns, piscivorous ; the swallow, insectivorous ; and the turtle dove and the quail, granivorous. They, however, present one point of resemblance. All of them, during their residence in this country, perform the important offices of pairing, incubation, and rearing their young; and hence may, with propriety, be termed the natives of the country. We hail their arrival as the harbingers of spring, and feel the blank which they leave on their departure, although it is in some measure supplied by another colony of the feathered race, who come to spend with us the dreary months of winter. 

The Winter Birds of Passage have more points of resemblance among themselves than those of the former division. They chiefly belong to the tribe of water-fowls. None of them are insectivorous, and very few are granivorous. They chiefly frequent the creeks and sheltered bays of the sea, and the inland lakes, or they obtain their food in marshy grounds, or at the margins of springs. When the rigours of the season are over, and when other birds which are stationary are preparing for incubation, these take their departure, to be again succeeded by our summer visitants. 

We have stated generally, that our summer and winter birds of passage visit us at stated seasons of the year ; that the summer visitants arrive in spring and depart in autumn ; and that the winter visitants arrive in autumn and depart in spring. But the different species do not all observe the same periods of arrival and departure. Thus, among the summer birds of passage, the wheat-ear always precedes the swallow, while the swallow arrives before the martin, and the martin before the corncrake. Among the winter birds of passage, similar differences in the time of arrival are observable. Thus the woodcock precedes the fieldfare, and the fieldfare the redwing. The periods of departure have not been observed with such attention, as the subjects have then lost their novelty, so that we do not readily perceive their absence. It is probable, however, that in their departure, as well as their arrival, each species has its particular period. 

The periods of arrival and departure, even in the same species, do not always take place at exactly the same day, or even month of the year. In different years these vary several weeks or even months, and evidently depend on very obvious circumstances. The meanest rustic, in regard to the summer birds of passage, is aware, that cold weather prevents the arrival of these messengers of spring ; and that the early arrival of our winter birds of passage indicates a proportionally early winter. The same circumstances of temperature which retard our summer visitants also check the progress of vegetation. Hence, in all probability, we might be able to prognosticate the arrival of these birds, by attending to the time of the leafing or flowering of particular trees or plants. As the state of vegetation depends on the temperature of the season, and the life of insects on the state of vegetation, we may safely conclude, that the movements of the phytivorous and insectivorous birds must be dependent on the condition of plants. 
Linnaeus bestowed some attention on these connected circumstances, in his Calendar of Flora for Sweden ; and Stilungfleet in that of England. Linnaeus observed, that the swallow returned to Sweden when the bird-cherry came into leaf, and when the wood-anemone flowered. He also found the arrival of the nightingale accompanied with the leafing of the elm. Still ingfleet says, that the swallow returns to Norfolk with the leafing of the hazel, and the nightingale with the leafing of the sycamore. It has also been observed, that the cuckoo sings when the marsh-marigold blows. It would tend greatly to increase our knowledge of this subject, were observations of this sort multiplied. We earnestly recommend the subject to the attention of the practical naturalist. 

Having thus offered a few observations on the periods of arrival and departure of migrating birds, let us now enquire after the places from whence they come and to which they return. In doing this, it will be proper to bestow some attention on the migrations of those birds which merely shift from one part of the island to another. The movements of such birds, though confined within narrow bounds, are probably regulated by the same laws, which, in the other species, produce more extensive migrations, and have the obvious advantage of being easily investigated. 

In the inland districts of Scotland, the lapwings make their appearance about the end of February or the beginning of March, and, after fulfilling the purposes of incubation, hasten to the sea-shore, there to spend the winter, and to support themselves by picking up the small Crustacea from among the rejectamenta of the sea. These birds seldom, however, remain all winter on the Scottish shores, though they are always to be found at that season on the southern English shores. In that part of the island they do not perform such extensive migrations, but may with propriety be considered as resident birds. The curlew arrives at the inland districts along with the lapwing, arid departs in company about the beginning of August. The curlew, however, remains on the Scottish shores during the winter. The oyster-catcher, though it breeds in Scotland, retires to the English shores inuring tlie winter, and joins those which have remained there during the breeding season. The black headed gull breeds both in England and Scotland ; but it retires from the last mentioned country, while it continues resident in the former. 

From the examples quoted, it appears that some birds, which are stationary in one district, are migratory in another. But that which chiefly merits our consideration is the circumstance of those birds, whose annual migrations are confined to our own shores, forsaking the high grounds on the decline of summer, and seeking for protection at a lower level, and in a warmer situation. When these migrations become more extensive, the bleak moors and shores of Scotland are exchanged for the warmer and more genial climate of England. Hence it happens, that some of our Scottish summer visitants come from England, while some of the English winter visitants come from Scotland ; the summer birds of passage coming from the south, and the winter passengers from the north. Do those birds that perform more extensive migrations obey the same laws. 

As the summer birds of passage are more interesting to us, since they perform the great work of incubation in our country, than the winter birds of passage, which are the harbingers of storms and cold, and only wait the return of spring to take their leave of us, we shall endeavour to find out the winter residence of the former, before we attempt to discover the summer haunts of the latter. Natural history, it is true, is still in too imperfect a state, to enable us to point out with certainty 
the retreats of all those birds which visit us during summer- But enough appears to be known to enable us to ascertain the laws by which these migrations are regulated in a number of birds ; and as the points of resemblance in the movements of the whole are numerous, we can reason from analogy on safer grounds with regard to the remainder. 

The swallow, about whose migrations so many idle stories have been propagated and believed, departs from Scotland about the end of September, and from England about the middle of October, In the latter month M. Adanson observed them on the shores of Africa after their migrations from Europe. He informs us, however, that they do not build their nests in that country, but only come to spend the winter. M. Prelqnc has not only confirmed the observations of Adanson, in reference to swallows, but has stated, at the same time, that the yellow and grey wagtails visit Senegal at the beginning of winter. The former {Motacillajlava) is well known as one of our summer visitants. The nightingale departs from England about the beginning of October, and from the other parts of Europe about the same period. During the winter season it is found in abundance in Lower Egypt, among the thickest coverts, in different parts of the Delta, These birds do not breed in that country, and to the inhabitants are merely winter birds of passage. They arrive in autumn and depart in spring, and at the time of migration are plentiful in the islands of the Archipelago. The quail is another of our summer guests, which has been traced to Africa. A few, indeed, brave the winters of England, and in Portugal they appear to be stationary. But in general they leave this country in autumn, and return in spring.  They migrate about the same time from the eastern parts of the Continent of Europe, and visit and revisit in their migrations the shores of the Mediterranean, Sicily, and the islands of the Archipelago. 

While these birds perform those extensive migrations which we have here mentioned, others are contented with shorter journeys. Thus, the razor-billed auk {Alcatorda) and the puffin (Alca wctlcd), frequent the coast of Andalusia during the winter season, and return to us in the spring. 

These facts, and many others of a similar nature, which might have been stated, enable us to draw the conclusion, that our summer birds of passage come to us from southern countries, and, after remaining during the warm season, return again to milder regions. A few of our summer visitants may winter in Spain or Portugal ; but it appears that in general they migrate to Africa, that unexplored country possessing every variety of surface, and consequently great diversity of climate. It is true that we are unacquainted with the winter retreats of many of our summer birds of passage, particularly of small birds ; but as these arrive and depart under similar circumstances with those whose migrations are ascertained, and as the operations which they perform during their residence with us are also similar, we have a right to conclude that they are subject to the same laws, and execute the same movements. What gives weight to this opinion, is the absence of all proof of a summer bird of passage retiring to the north during the winter season. 

In proof of the accuracy of the preceding conclusion, we may observe, that it is a fact generally acknowledged, that the summer birds of passage visit the southern parts of the country a few clays, or even weeks, before they make their appearance in the northern districts. Thus, the common swallow {Hinmdo rustkct) appears in Sussex about the beginning of the third week of April ; while in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh it is seldom seen before the first of May. The cuckoo appears in the same district about the last week of April ; in Edinburgh seldom before the second week of May. The reverse of this holds true with these summer visitants at their departure. Thus, dotterels {Charadr'ius mor'mcllus) forsake the Grampians about the beginning of August, and Scotland by the end of that month ; while they return to England in September, and remain there even until November, A difference of nearly a month takes place between the departure of the goatsucker from Scotland and from the south of England. 

Having thus ascertained the winter haunts of our summer birds of passage, let us now endeavour to find out the summer retreat of our winter visitants. The conclusions which we have already established dispose us to look for these birds in countries situated to the northward. And as we are much better acquainted with the ornithology of those countries than of Africa, it will be in our power to prosecute our researches with greater certainty of success. 

The snow-bunting {Emberiza nivalis) which is among the smallest of our winter guests, retires to the hoary mountains of Spitzbergcn, Greenland, and Lapland, and there executes the purposes of incubation, making its nest in the fissures of the rocks. In these countries it is therefore a summer visitant, as it retires southward in autumn, to spend the winter in more temperate regions. To  sea-coasts of the same countries, the little auk {Alca alk), and the black-billed auk {Alca pica), repair for similar purposes as the snow-flake. The woodcock winters with us, but retires in the spring to Sweden, Norway, and Lapland. 

The fieldfare and the redwing resemble the woodcock in their migrations, depart at the same season, and retire for similar purposes to the same countries. 

These instances may suffice to support the conclusion, that all our winter birds of passage come from northern countries, and that the winter visitants of the south of Europe become the summer visitants of its northern regions. This is evidently an arrangement depending on the same law by which the African winter visitants become the summer birds of passage in Europe. 

In support of this conclusion it may be mentioned, that, in their progress southward, the winter visitants appear first in the northern and eastern parts of the island, and gradually proceed to the southward and westward. Thus the snow-bunting arrives in the Orkney islands about the end of August, and often proves destructive to the corn fields. It then passes into the mainland of Scotland, 
and is seldom seen in the Lothians, even in the high grounds, before November. In like manner, the woodcock, which crosses the German Ocean, is first observed on the eastern side of the island, and then by degrees disperses towards the west and south. 
That these periodical movements take place, in order to guard against the vicissitudes of the seasons, must appear obvious to all, from the consideration of the facts which have been stated. An early winter brings the migrating birds from the north to this country before their usual time, and an early spring hastens the arrival of our summer visitants. In the beginning of winter the snow-bunting is found only in the high grounds, and it descends to a lower level with the increasing severity of the season. 

During the autumn, we thus observe a latitudinal movement of many species of birds towards the equator, in search of the temperature congenial to their constitutions, and which the winter of the district of their summer residence could not afford. The autumnal shifting of the feathered tribes, may therefore, with propriety, be termed the Equatorial Migration ; all those species in which it is observed, returning from the pole towards the equator, each according to limits peculiar to itself.

The vernal shifting takes place with the increasing temperature of the high latitudes, and may be termed the Polar Migration, as all the species in which it is observed recede from the equator and approach towards the pole. 
The extent of degrees of latitude traversed in these migrations, differs, as we have seen, according to the species, and even in the same species in different parallels of longitude. 
Thus, the nightingale, in its polar migrations, does not reach the 55° of north latitude in Britain, while in Sweden it reaches to the 60°. Anomalies of this kind cease to excite our surprise, when it is considered, that the isothermal lines (or the latitudinal lines under which the mean annual temperature is the same), are not parallel with the sun's course, or do not observe a regular increase or diminution with the difference of latitude. Even the isotherial lines, (under which the mean heat of summer is the same), and the isotheimal lines, (under which the mean heat of winter is the same), are neither parallel to one another, nor to the isothermal lines. These differences, which Humboldt has investigated with so much success, exercise a powerful influence on the distribution of plants and animals, and regulate the limits of those periodical migrations we have now been considering. 

The preceding remarks relate to the equatorial and north polar migrations. Movements depending on the same circumstances in all probability, take place on the other side of the equator towards the south pole. The Cape swallow {Hirimdo Cajjensis), according to the observations of Captain Carmichael, arrives at the southern extremity of Africa in the month of September, the commencement of the summer of that district, and departs again in March or April, on the approach of winter. Reasoning from the analogies of the north polar migrations, we may conclude, that this species of swallow resides the remaining part of the year near the equator, and that its south polar migrations extend to the Cape of Good Hope. 
It appears from these movements of birds, that, in the cold season, the polar regions are deserted by some species, and that there is an accumulation of life towards the equator. At another season, the equatorial regions are, in some measure, deserted by their temporary inhabitants, and the polar districts become peopled by the change. 

Having now ascertained the period and the direction of these migrations, let us next attend to the act of migration itself, and the circumstances attending the flight. 

Migrating birds, before they take their departure, in general collect together in flocks. This is very obviously the case with the swallow, and is even still better known with woodcocks, terns, puffins, and shearwaters. Woodcocks arrive in this country in great flocks about the same time ; .and should adverse winds occur at the period of their departure, they accumulate in such numbers on the eastern shores, as to furnish the fowler with excellent sport. Geese too, dotterels, and many others, during their migratory flights, always keep in company. 

But there are many migrating birds which have never been observed to congregate previous to their departure. Thus the cuckoo, seldom seen in company with his mate even during the breeding season, is, to all appearance, equally solitary at the period of migration. These birds are supposed by naturalists to go off in succession. 

It is certainly a very curious, and perhaps unexpected occurrence, that the males of many species of migrating birds appear to perform their migrations a few days before the females. This is remarkably the case with the nightingale. The bird-catchers in the neighbourhood of London, procure males only on the first arrival of this bird. The females do not make their appearance for a week or ten days after. Similar observations have been made with respect to the wheat-ear. 


Those birds which feed during the night may be expected to perform their migrations during the same interval, it being the season of their activity ; while those birds which feed during the day, may be expected to migrate with the help of light. The migrations of the woodcock and quail confirm this conjecture. The woodcocks arrive in this country during the night, and hence they are sometimes found in the morning after their arrival, in a neighbouring ditch, in too weak a state to enable them to proceed. Poachers are aware that they migrate during the night, and sometimes kindle fires on the coast, to which the wood-cocks, attracted by the light, bend their course, and in this manner great numbers are annually destroyed. Quails, on the other hand, perform their migrations during the day, so that the sportsman in the islands of the Mediterranean can use his dog and gun. 

It has often excited surprise in the minds of some, how migrating birds could support themselves so long on wing, as to accomplish their journeys, and at the same time live without food during their voyage. These circumstances have induced many to deny the existence of migration, and have excited others to form the most extravagant theories on the subject, to account for the preservation of these birds during the winter months. But the difficulties which have been stated, are only in appearance, and vanish altogether if we attend to the rapidity of the flight of birds. 

The rapidity with which a hawk and many other birds occasionally fly, is probably not less than at the rate of 150 miles in an hour. Major Cartwright, on the coast of Labrador, found, by repeated observations, that the flight of an eider duck (Anas inolissima) was at the rate of 90 miles per hour. Sir George Cayley computes the rate of flight, even of the common crow, at nearly 25 miles an hour; and Spallanzani found that of the swallow completed about 92 miles, while he conjectures that the rapidity of the swift is nearly three times greater. A falcon which belonged to Henuy the Fourth of France, escaped from Fountainbleau, and in twenty-four hours afterwards was found at Malta, a distance computed to be no less than 1350 miles ; a velocity nearly equal to 57 miles an hour, supposing the falcon to have been on wing the whole time. 
But as such birds never fly by night, and allowing the day to be at the longest, his flight was perhaps equal to 75 miles an hour. It is probable, however, says Montagu, that he neither had so many hours of light in the twenty-four, to perform his journey, nor that he was retaken the moment of his arrival. But if we even restrict the migratory flight of birds to the rate of 50 miles an hour, how easily can they perform their most extensive migrations ! And we know, in the case of woodcocks, and perhaps all other migrating birds, that they in general take advantage of a fair wind with which to perform their flights. This breeze perhaps aids them at the rate of 30 or 40 miles an hour ; nay, with three times greater rapidity, even in a moderate breeze, if we are to give credit to the statement of aerial navigators, who seem to consider the rate of the motion of winds as in general stated too low. 

It has been already observed, that many species do not perform their migrations at once, but reach the end of their journey by short and easy stages. There is little exertion required from such ; while those who execute their movements at one flight, (if there be any that do so), may in a very short time, perhaps a day, by the help of a favourable breeze, reach the utmost limits of their journey. Many birds, we know, can subsist a long time without food ; but there appears to be no necessity for supposing any such abstinence, since, as Gates by remarked, every day affords an increase of warmth, and a supply of food. Hence we need not perplex ourselves in accounting for the continuance of their flight, or their sustenance in the course of it. 
Such journeys would be long indeed for any quadruped, while they are soon performed by the feathered tribes. 

It is often stated as a matter of surprise, how these birds know the precise time of the year at which to execute their movements, or the direction in which to migrate. But this is merely expressing a surprise, that a kind and watchful Providence should bestow on the feathered creation powers and instincts suited to their wants, and calculated to supply them. How, we ask, does the curlew, when perched upon a neighbouring muir during the flowing of the tide, know to return at the first of the ebb, to pick up the accidental bounty of the waves ? How are the sea-fowl, in hazy weather, guided to the sea-girt isles they inhabit, with food to their young, which they have procured at the distance of many miles ? 
In the course of these annual migrations, birds are sometimes overtaken by storms of contrary wind, and carried far from their usual course. In such cases, they stray to unknown countries, or sometimes are found at sea in a very exhausted state, clinging to the rigging of ships. Such accidents, however, seldom happen, as these birds, year after year, arrive in the same country, and even return to the same spot. The summer birds of passage return not, it is true, in such numbers as when they left us ; but, amidst all the dangers of their voyage, the race is preserved. 

We thus see, that animals possess various resources, to enable them to accommodate themselves to the variations of temperature corresponding with the seasons. But these appear in some species to be inadequate for their protection, and another is provided for their safety. 


