The island of Papa Stour is situated on the west side of the Mainland (or largest island) of Zetland, and forms the south side of the entrance into St Magnus Bay. It possesses no hills of any considerable height. It is of a very irregular form, being deeply indented with four bays, which are here termed voes, viz. Houseavoe, Olisvoe, Culliesvoe, and Hamnavoe. In these bays, the shore is somewhat level, but in other parts of the island, it is bold and rocky, presenting to the furious Atlantic, precipices several hundred feet in height. In these rocks, there are numerous caves, which form commodious retreats for seals; and at different parts of the coast, there are naked insulated projecting masses of rock, on which myriads of sea-fowl hatch their young in safety, the steep sides of these islets preventing even the enterprising natives from reaching their summits. As the rocks of Papa Stour are of very different degrees of induration, so the sea has in many places made great encroachments, and formed creeks and caves of considerable magnitude. These present great obstacles to the examination of the mineralogy of this island, in consequence of the place of junction of the different rocks, being often covered by loose blocks of stone, or concealed in the recess of a deep and gloomy cave.
The strata are in general nearly horizontal, seldom vertical, and in a few instances trough shaped and bason-shaped. In many places they present appearances of much confusion. Immense slips or translations of the strata have taken place, whereby they have been depressed many fathoms since their original deposition. These translations are not confined to particular beds of rock, but have taken place generally over the island. In these translations, the beds on the hanging side are always depressed, and lower than the same bed on the lying side. Appearances of this kind may be seen at Ungly-braed-hcad, and Lammer-banks.

The rocks of this island appear to be the following: Sandstone, Slate-clay, Amygdaloid, Greenstone, Breccia, Compact-felspar, Porphyritic-slatyfelspar, and Claystone. I shall, therefore, proceed to give an account of the appearances accompanying each of these rocks.
The rocks of sandstone chiefly occur at Houseavoe and the Kirk-sand. The beds are usually thin. It is often of a brown and also of a greenish-grey colour. It is fine-grained in some instances. It frequently contains rounded nodules of quartz, and is much mixed with quartz. When it contains much mica, it splits into plates. The surface of the beds is sometimes elegantly undulated, similar to the impressions made on the sand of the sea shore by the retiring waves. This appearance on the surface of the beds of sandstone has in all probability been occasioned by the action of the same cause.
The different seams of the sandstone are generally separated from each other by thin beds of clay, and also by beds of breccia. On the north side of Houseavoe, the sandstone covers a bed of amygdaloid, and at the Kirk-sand it alternates with beds of amygdaloid and greenstone. At a place called Little-Peatie's-gio, the sandstone is covered with a bed of breccia, upon which it also rests, and both these beds of sandstone and breccias test on a thick bed of compact-felspar inclining to claystone. At Olisvoe, northward from the Bootbe, a thin bed of sandstone is inclosed between beds of compact-felspar, which is very hard owing to intermixed quartz. At Forewick it is covered with beds of compact-felspar. At the point of contact, the horizontal beds of sandstone suddenly bend downwards to a much-inclined position, and the beds of compact-felspar rest on the inclining beds of sandstone. The two rocks are separated from each other, by a thin division of clayey sand. The direction of the slaty structure of the compact-felspar at the line of junction, is parallel with the inclined surface of the beds of sandstone; and hence, it is in all probability the margin of a bason-shaped hollow in the strata, and not a slip or translation, as I at first supposed. The sandstone at Forewick, alternates with beds of slate-clay. Between Forewick and North-house, the sandstone is covered with thick strata of compact-felspar, and porphyritic claystone.
The beds of sandstone, which are horizontal, are separated from the felspar, by a division of soft clayey matter arising from the decomposition of both rocks. These rocks are in conformable stratification, and seem to have been equally exposed to dislocation, as several slips are to be observed.
Both the sandstone, and its covering of felspar, have undergone a depression of several yards. 
This rock occurs very sparingly in this island. It sometimes makes its appearance between beds of sandstone, and at Forewick it exists in thick beds. It is often mixed with mica, and then passes into slaty-sandstone.
AMYGDALOID.
The beds of this rock are of considerable thickness. Its basis seems to be a claystone, of a greyish-black colour. It contains numerous cavities, rilled with different crystalline minerals, as calcspar, heavy-spar, fluor-spar, and quartz. As these substances are liable to fall out by being decomposed,the empty vesicles then give the stone the appearance of vesicular lava. These vesicles are sometimes filled with calcedony, or with calc-spar, and in company with these, crystals of quartz, heavyspar, and fluor-spar are likewise found. When all these substances occurred in the same cavity, they were arranged in the following order. The calcedony covered the cavity nearest the ir>ck, the quartz was imposed upon the calcedony, and covered with the calc-spar: The heavy-spar rested on the calc-spar, and the remaining cavities of the vesicle were filled with fluor spar. The crystals of the calc-spar were often rhomboidal and sometimes prismatic. The fluor-spar was least abundant. Hence, it appears, that as the fluor-spar formed the central part or the cavity, it had been last deposited, and that the calcedony, which inclosed the others, was the oldest formed.
On the north side of Houseavoe, the amygdaloid is covered with the sandstone, floating pieces of which it likewise contains, sometimes of the quartly kind. The surface of these floating masses was parallel with the surface of the bed of amygdaloid. At the west side of Kirk-sand, it distinctly alternates with the sandstone, and seems in some places to have a slaty structure. It alternates with felspar, containing much quartz, at Culliesvoe. At a place called Herdygio, the amygdaloid alternates with breccia, and both these beds are covered with a thick bed of compactfelspar, passing to claystone. Two slips occur at this place, which affect equally the amygdaloid and felspar. The amygdaloid is traversed by small veins of haematite, and the neighbouring rocks are much impregnated with iron.
The two component ingredients of this rock, the felspar and hornblende, being often intimately mixed, it is difficult to distinguish them from each other. The beds are of moderate thickness. To the westward of the Kirk-sand, several beds of greenstone alternate with the sandstone in a very regular manner; and on the west side of Pulliesvoe, it likewise appears to rest upon a bed of compact-felspar, although their relative position is by no means obvious.
By this, I mean a rock of angular fragments, cemented by a basis of a different composition.
I have employed this word, which is of frequent use, to express an aggregated rock of angular fragments, cemented by a basis of a different composition. It differs from Puddingstone, not only in the cement, but in the fragments not being rounded. From Conglomerate, it likewise differs, in the fragments not being the same with the cement. In Zetland, there are three distinct kinds of agglutinated rocks :—The first consists of angular fragments of porphyritic or compact-felspar rocks, cemented by a clayey or sandstone basis. It occurs in thin beds. This I have termed Breccia.—The second is moderately fine-grained sandstone, containing rounded masses of granite, gneiss, and other rocks of the primitive class, from the size of an egg, to one or two feet in diameter. These beds are of great thickness.—Lastly, clayey sandstone, including angular fragments of similar composition, the cement and the fragments being the same. This occurs in moderately thin beds, along with fine-grained sandstone. This last kind is, with propriety, termed Sandstone-conglomerate; but the same phrase does not appear so applicable to the second kind, whose imbedded masses claim a very different origin,

The fragments, which are small, seldom exceeding a pea in size, consist of compact felspar, and, in one instance, of sandstone. The cement is a greenish-coloured clay, of various degrees of induration, and, in some instances, it seems to be sandstone. When fresh broken, the stone has a homogeneous appearance; but where it has been exposed to the influence of the weather, the fragments are very distinct, the cement having been decomposed.
At Houseavoe, the breccia alternates with the sandstone, and is in thin bed6. At Hirdy-gio, it alternates with the amygdaloid. At Unglybraed-head, there is first a bed of felspar, much mixed with quartz, and presenting a number of diverging radiated points: above this bed, breccia occurs, indistinctly stratified, into which the felspar passes: over this bed of breccia, there is another divided into thin strata, and containing galls of green-clay, and nodules of compact-felspar; and above all, is a bed of amygdaloid. These beds are altered from their original situation, by a slip, which elevates or depresses them six or seven yards. At Little-Peatie's-gio, there is first a bed of compact-felspar ; over it breccia, with layers of a rock of felspar, inclining to clayatone and much intermixed with quartz ; and above all, beds of amygdaloid. At Bordie, there are first vertical strata of felspar, separated from each other by thin layers of greenish clay. The felspar is in the form of globular distinct concretions, with cavities lined with quartz, or filled with steatite: this bed is covered with beds of breccia, similar to those at Little-Peatie's-gio, in an unconformable position, the strata of felspar being vertical, and those of the breccia horizontal. The strata of breccia, are separated by clay, similar to that which separates the strata of felspar. A bed of red compact felspar covers the breccia. The breccia, in this place likewise, contained fragments of sandstone.
This rock is of a reddish-brown colour, and occurs in the form of thick beds, which, in some instances, appear to be seamed or stratified. At Lammer-banks, on the east side of Houseavoe, it rests on beds of sandstone, being separated there from by a thin partition of clay. Both these beds rest in a horizontal position. The compact-felspar is porphyritic, containing crystals of felspar, likewise of a red colour. This bed, in another place between theKirk-sand and Forewick, alternates or rather is intimately mixed with a variety of porphyritic slaty-felspar. On the west side of the island, it covers beds of breccia and amygdaloid. To the eastward of Hirdy-gio, it is in the form of a conglomerate, containing angular masses, having the cement and fragments of similar composition and appearance. At Little-Peatie'sgio, the compact-felspar is covered with breccia, and a rock of felspar that contains much quartz. The compact-felspar, in some instances, contains crystals of disintegrated felspar and steatite. It is usually massive; but it seems, upon assuming the porphyritic structure, to have a slaty structure; as near Hirdy-io, where the slaty fracture is very distinct.
This rock chiefly occurs at a place called Stain, between Houseavoe and Olisvoe. It is of a bluish grey colour. The beds are moderately thin, not much inclined, and considerably decayed, as appears by numerous fissures or rents which traverse them. It contains crystals of red felspar, thus forming porphyritic-claystone. Two curious varieties of this rock are here to be observed: the first is a claystone-conglomerate, containing angular fragments of the claystone, connected by an impure cement of claystone, mixed with mica and sand: in the second variety, the claystone occurs in the form of globular distinct concretions, connected by a softer basis than the concretions themselves, which are hard, and Hearty resemble the fragments which compose the breccia rocks. The concretions are porphyritic, as is also the cementing claystone. Both these varieties are included in the bedsof porphyritic claystone. This bed rests upon a porphyritic rock, which is intermediate between the compact felspar and claystone, but has a distinctly slaty structure. On the south-side, towards Houseavoe, it passes, by imperceptible degrees, into amygdaloid, which appears to rest upon the claystone, and to be covered in its turn with the sandstone.
By this I mean, rocks having a basis of felspar of considerable hardness, containing imbedded crystals of felspar, thus constituting a porphyry, and having the principle fracture slaty, thus forming a porphyritic-slate. The colour is usually reddish brown. The cross fracture fine splintery. It contains crystals of red felspar, and rounded grains of quartz; which last are often disposed in the direction of the principal fracture. It also contains small cavities filled with steatite. It is sometimes in the form of distinct concretions, as at Ungly-braed-head, where it passes into the breccia which covers it. At Bordie, it is beautifully formed into distinct concretions, as formerly mentioned. It is here covered by breccia. On the east side of Olisvoe, it is in the form of a conglomerate; the cement and the fragments cemented, being both of the same composition. At the east side of the Kirk-sand, it seems to lose in some measure its slaty structure, and to pass into porphyritic-claystone. At Culliesvoe, it is of a greyish-black colour, the felspar in small quantity, and presenting the appearance of certain varieties of porphyry-slate; and on the west side of the same voe, it is compact, of a red colour, and full of minute grains of quartz. It is intimately connected with the claystone, compact-felspar, amygdaloid; and breccia rocks.
All the rocks enumerated above, are traversed1 by veins filled with calc-spar, heavy-spar, quartz.
* Three kinds of Conglomerate have been mentioned a bove, viz,. Compact-felspar Conglomerate; Claystone Conglomerate; and Porphyritic-slaty-felspar Conglomerate. This occurrence does not seem to warrant the conclusion, that the beds of felspar, claystone, and porphyritic-slatyfelspar, owe their origin to rocks of a similar kind, but much more ancient, and belonging to a different order of things; but rather support the conclusion, that disturbances have taken place in the fluid, during the period of deposition, of sufficient extent, to break into fragments, portions of the naw-formed rocks; and that the individual beds of the series have been frequently repeated. This may serve also to explain the occurrence of the breccia at Bordie, in unconformable stratification, and covered also with compact-felspar.
From the above statement of facts, it does not seem improper to conclude, that all the beds of rock in Papa Stour, belong to one and the same formation. Besides the support which this conclusion receives from the account of the relative position of the different rocks as mentioned above, it is likewise countenanced by the occurrence of veins in the different beds, filled with similar mineral substances; and particularly, from the circumstance of those slips, or dislocations of the strata, whereby the beds are depressed, and which affect the beds of sandstone, compact felspar, and porphyry-slate, and the other rocks in the island, all in a similar manner. This probably would not have been the case if they had belonged to separate formations. The fissures, formed in consequence of these slips, are filled with decomposed portions of the surrounding strata.
Since the conclusion,—that the rocks of Papa Stour belong to one and the same formation,—appears supported by such proof, it still remains to be determined, to which of the formations, in the class of floetz-rocks, they ought to be referred.
The sandstone of Papa Stour, is exactly similar to the sandstone in the islands of Foulah and Bressay. In the former of these islands, the sandstone is accompanied with bituminous-shale and clay-ironstone, and rests on gneiss as the fundamental rock. In Bressay, the sandstone includes beds of slate-clay, and contains vegetable impressions, similar to those common in the sandstone of the coal-fields of the Lothians. Hence it seems reasonable to conclude, that the different rocks in the island of Papa Stour, together with the sandstone of the Zetland Islands, belong to the independent Coal Formation.
I shall be happy, if this communication shall be thought to afford an answer, in some degree satisfactory, to two of the mineralogical queries suggested by my esteemed friend, the President of the Wernerian Natural History Society.

