
The science of Geology was first introduced to public notice, in this country, by philosophers who, while they cherished a reverential regard for the authority of the Scriptures, overlooked those methods of investigation which lead to a discovery of the laws of nature. Assuming that the first principles of geology were revealed to Moses, and communicated in the Book of Genesis, they were satisfied with a comparison of the scanty notices there given of the history of the Earth with the phenomena presented by its surface, even when the character and relation of these phenomena remained in a state of comparative obscurity. The original condition of the materials with which the Creator formed this Globe, long occupied the attention of those early cosmogonists ; and, as the history of Moses was too meager in its details to serve their purpose, and the Earth failed to ex- 
hibit the suitable documents, the imagination was called upon to supply that which neither the words nor the works of the Deity furnished. These reveries, however, usually termed Theories of the Earth, do not call for any comment at present. The cause by which the deluge was produced, and the changes which it effected on the appearance of the globe, occupied the second place in the estimation of these geologists. Here, again, the details of Revelation were so deficient as to lead some to suppose that our copy of the Book of Genesis was more abridged than the one possessed by the ancient Jews. The surface of the Earth was hastily looked at for proofs of the effects of this catastrophe ; and again the imagination supplied that which observation could not yield. Burnet 
brought the waters from below, through the broken crust with which he fancied they had been covered during the antediluvian period, and with the fragments of this crust he formed the mountains. Woodward suspended, for a time, all cohesion among the particles of earth, and reduced the globe to a soft paste ; while Whiston, not inferior in fancy to any of his predecessors, called a comet to his aid.
While philosophers were thus claiming the attention of the public in favour of their efforts to reconcile geology with revelation, they were powerfully assisted by individuals of another description. The “Place of Descent” where the “Ark” rested, had long been regarded as determined ; remains of the timber had been preserved ; and many pieces of the bitumen, with which it was calked, had been carried off to be employed as amulets for averting mischief. The skeletons of the antediluvian inhabitants were eagerly sought after; and the Continent of Europe seemed to furnish the expected, documents even the grinders and thigh-bones of the antediluvian giants were disinterred from those graves which for so many ages they had occupied. 
As science advanced, these theories of the deluge appeared in their true light ; as unsupported by the statements in Scripture, and as inconsistent with the phenomena of nature. The skeleton of the antediluvian man became that of an acknowledged reptile ; while the grinders and thigh-bones of the giants were admitted to belong to elephants. The geologist beheld his theories vanish like a dream, and the admirer of revelation felt (though very unnecessarily) as if a pillar of his faith had become a broken reed. Geology, by these premature attempts at generalization, fell into discredit as a science among philosophers, and by the Christian it was viewed with suspicion. 
The former had witnessed opinions and assertions substituted for facts; and the latter had reaped the fruits of misplaced confidence. The friend of revelation had begun to consider the history of the deluge as the least perfect of those records which Moses has transmitted, since no proofs could be found in nature to attest the occurrence of the catastrophe. Need we be surprised, therefore, that a considerable degree of anxiety should prevail on this subject, with the religious public, and that any fresh attempt to revive their hopes would meet with a cordial, I had almost said a credulous, welcome ? The truth of this view has been put to the test. 
Baron Cuvier, so deservedly celebrated as a comparative anatomist, having devoted much labour to the investigation of fossil bones, naturally directed some portion of his attention to those collateral subjects which might serve to illustrate their history. In the preliminary discourse to his great work on u Fossil Bones,” he announced the important results to which his labours, reading, and reflection had conducted him. This discourse was published in Edinburgh, in 1813, under the title of 
“ Cuvier’s Theory of the Earth.” It has gone through several editions, and still continues to be a favourite with the public. It has contributed, in a very great degree, to render the study of geology popular in this country. How far the explanations which it offers of the phenomena of nature are true, and how far they are consistent with the sacred writings, will afterwards be considered. 
The Reverend William Buckland, while Professor of Mineralogy in Oxford, appears to have embraced Baron Cuvier’s views respecting the deluge ; and, under their influence, distributed the modern strata (exclusive of the volcanic) into Post-diluvian detritus and Diluvian detritus. In his “ Inaugural Lecture,” which was delivered May 15. 1819, before the University of Oxford, on the endowment of a readership in geology, he selected for the title, “ Vindicias Geologicae ; or the Connection of Geology with Revelation explained and stated in the dedication, “ that the facts developed by it (geology) are consistent with the accounts of the creation and deluge recorded in the Mosaic writings.” In his subsequent inquiries, this learned and indefatigable Professor, who has contributed so much to exalt the geological character of England, has not only investigated the history of those beds of gravel and clay which contain fossil bones, but has successfully explored many caves which he considers as having been the dens of antediluvian animals. The results of these inquiries he has published in his “Reliquiae Diluvianae,” in which he considers geology as “attesting the action of an universal deluge.” This work, like the “Theory” of Cuvier, has greatly contributed to render the science of geology popular, by bringing it into favour with the Church, and even securing the countenance of the drawing-room. The general reader has been charmed with the novel scenes which it discloses, while the Christian has hailed it with joy, as offering a valuable testimonial to the authority of revelation. 
To my “Remarks illustrative of the influence of Society on the Distribution of British Animals,” inserted in No. XXII. of this Journal, Professor Buckland has conceived it necessary to make a “Reply,” which has a place in No. XXIV. In this communication, he continues to advocate the opinions which he had advanced in the “Reliquiae Diluvianae,” and attempts to obviate some of the objections which had been, incidentally stated against them. 
In an inquiry of this kind, regarded as highly interesting to the philosopher and the Christian, it seems requisite to exercise extreme caution. The fate of former theories in geology, which professed to explain the phenomena of nature, and to strengthen the authority of revelation, but which inquiry demonstrated to be visionary, intimates the risk of error, and calls for a minute examination of the value of the proofs adduced. I enter upon this inquiry as one deeply interested in the authority of revelation, and not indifferent to the progress of geological science. 
My remarks may not appear convincing, but they may excite that inquiry and discussion which lead to truth. It is impossible, however, in a paper of this kind, to enter into all the details which the general reader would probably desire. The outlines only of the subject can be noticed. 
In reference to this important subject, two questions naturally occur to the mind : — 1. Does the character of any of the members of the modern strata demonstrate the occurrence of a universal flood, as exclusively the agent in their formation ? — Does the character of the geological deluge, as supposed to be indicated by the phenomena of nature, agree with the character 
of the deluge of Noah, given by Moses ? 
In the following observations, I shall reverse this order of inquiry, for if the second question can be satisfactorily disposed of in the negative, it will leave the first to be examined entirely by the laws of physics, and in the absence of those 'prejudices which have been excited in the public mind on the subject. As a proof that such prejudices do exist, I may state that I have heard a gentleman of rank and piety, characterize the opposers of the diluvian hypothesis as embracing “ the infidel side of the question ;” and this, too, in the presence of the president and secretaries of the Geological Society of London. It is my object, in the present communication, to point out the infidel side of the question, viz. the one where error prevails. Nature, misinerpreted, may amuse the cosmogonist, but never can befriend the Christian. That which is true in science can alone give useful support to revelation ; and that which is true in science never can be found opposed to its interests. 
Docs the character of the Geological Deluge, as supposed to he indicated by the phenomena of nature , agree with the character given of the Deluge of Noah, by Moses? 
Before proceeding to state some of those points of difference between the two deluges, which appear to exist, I feel it to be necessary to notice one opinion which Baron Cuvier expresses without reserve. After intimating that 66 Moses and his people came out of Egypt,” (Cuvier’s Theory, p. 147.), he adds, “ The legislator of the Jews could have no motive for shortening the duration of the nations, and would even have disgraced himself in the estimation of his own, if he had promulgated a history of the human race contradictory to that which they must have learned by tradition in Egypt. We may therefore conclude, that the Egyptians had, at this time, no other notions respecting the antiquity of the human race than are contained in the Book of Genesis.” It is true, that Moses and his people came out of Egypt ; but it is equally true that their fathers went into Egypt. 
Where, then, is the proof, that the history of the creation and the deluge, as given by Moses, was derived from the traditions of the Egyptians ? Will the friend of revelation consider himself as under obligations to Baron Cuvier for this discovery?  Or will the student of moral science admit its truth ? Those individuals, in Britain, who cherish the highest respect for the authority of revelation, consider the information which Moses communicates as having been derived from a higher source than 
Egyptian tradition ; and even the author of the strange remark acknowledges (p. 149-)? that the Egyptians themselves had forgotten, for a long period, the tradition, u as we do not find any traces of it in the most ancient remaining fragments from that country. All of these, indeed, are posterior to the devastations committed by Cambyses.” But where is the proof that the 
Egyptians possessed those traditions which the Jewish legislator has recorded, a thousand years before any traces of them occur in the monuments of their country, except the very inadequate one,  “that Moses and his people came out of Egypt !” The cultivator of moral science, whose attention has long been arrested by the purity of the theism of the Jews, will naturally inquire, If Moses obtained all his knowledge of the creation and the deluge from the opinions or traditions of the Egyptians, may he not have derived his knowledge of the moral law from the same source ? And may not the inquirer infer, that the prohibitory statutes against idolatry were forgotten by the Egyptians (and continue to be so), as had happened to them with respect to their traditions of the deluge, immediately after they had succeeded in impressing on the mind of the Jewish legislator a correct idea of their importance ! To such results, in my opinion, would Baron Cuvier’s views legitimately lead. Nor, in the last edition of his great work, does he treat the authority of Moses with higher respect, since he considers the book of Genesis, as consisting of the shreds of former works. Having made these preliminary remarks, I now proceed to point out those differences of character which appear to exist between the geological and Noachian deluges, and which prevent us from inferring their identity. 

1. The geological deluge, as interpreted by Baron Cuvier, was of such a nature as to permit the escape of different races of men by different routes. The Mongolian and Caucasian races are so different in appearance from each other, “that one is almost tempted to suspect, that their ancestors and ours had escaped from the last grand catastrophe at two different sides.” In reference to the Negroes, he states a similar opinion with less hesitation : “The circumstances of their character clearly evince, that they also have escaped from the last grand catastrophe, perhaps by another route than the races of the Caucasian and Altaic chains, from whom, perhaps, they may have been long separated before the epoch of that catastrophe.” On the supposition that the different races of men were derived from a common stock, an idea sanctioned by revelation, supported by the 
truths of zoology, and tacitly admitted by our author, it seems difficult to discover any proof of their separation having been antediluvian. According to Moses, all that escaped of the human race, w r ere eight individuals of the family of Noah. Here, then, we have the character of the geological deluge, in reference to the human race, as interpreted by Baron Cuvier, standing opposed to the history of the deluge as given by Moses, and that, too, in its most important feature. 
2. The geological deluge, as interpreted by Baron Cuvier and Professor Buckland, occasioned the destruction of all the individuals of many species of quadrupeds. As examples of those which have thus suffered extinction, may be quoted, the fossil elephant, fossil hippopotamus, fossil rhinoceros, fossil bear, and fossil hyaena, besides many others. These have been, somewhat presumptuously, termed antediluvian animals  In the history of the Noachian deluge, as given by Moses, it is expressly stated, that clean and unclean beasts, fowls after their kind, cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing of the earth, two of every sort, male and female, were taken into the ark, preserved in the ark, and brought forth in safety from the ark, and dismissed with the mandate of their Creator to breed abundantly on the earth, and to be fruitful and multiply upon the earth. Here, then, we have revelation, declaring that, of all species of quadrupeds a male and female were spared and preserved during the deluge ; while we have the phenomena of nature, as interpreted by the geologists we have quoted, intimating, that all the individuals , of many species , were not spared, not preserved, but annihilated , by the catastrophe. An error must exist in one of these statements. 
The declaration of Moses is positive. The phenomena of nature may not have been suitably investigated. Shall we reject, then, the conclusions of the geologist, and respect the authority of Moses, or give the preference to Cuvier and Buckland ? 
3. According to Baron Cuvier, “this revolution had buried all the countries which were before inhabited by men, and by the other animals that are now best known ; and the same revolution had laid dry the bed of the last ocean, which now forms all the countries at present inhabited.” (Theory, p. 171.) Moses expressly tells us, that the flood of waters was upon the earth, prevailing exceedingly upon the earth, and covering the highest hills ; that the waters returned from off the earth. Here, again, we have the opinion of Cuvier, in direct opposition to the whole tenor of the history of the Noachian deluge. Nor need we be surprised at this, since he seems to be in opposition to himself. 
At one time he supposes, that the inundation did not reach to  the summits of the higher mountain chains ; and that Mongols, Caucasians, and Negroes may have escaped by different sides, or by different routes ; at another, that the bed of the antediluvian ocean is now the abode of the post-diluvian quadrupeds. 
4. The geological deluge, as interpreted by Professor Buckland, was sudden, transient, universal, simultaneous, rushing with an overwhelming impetuosity, infinitely more powerful than the most violent waterspouts. In the history of the Noachian deluge by Moses, there is not a term employed which indicates any one of the characters, except universality, attributed to the 
geological deluge. On the contrary, the flood neither approached nor retired suddenly. The waters rose upon the earth, during the continuance of the rain, for forty days ; and they retired slowly, upon the rain being restrained. There is no notice taken of the furious movements of the waters, which must have driven the ark violently to and fro. On the contrary, there is reason 
to believe, from the writings of Moses, that the ark had not drifted far from the spot where it was at first lifted up, and that it grounded at no great distance from the same spot. 
5. The geological deluge, as interpreted by Professor Buckland, excavated, in its fury, deep valleys, tearing up portions of the solid rock, and transporting to a distance the wreck which it had produced. On this supposition, the aspect of the antediluvian world must have been widely different from the present; lakes, and valleys, and seas, now existing in places formerly occupied by rocks, and the courses of rivers greatly altered. In the Book of Genesis there is no such change hinted at. On the 
contrary, the countries and rivers which existed before the flood, do not appear, from any thing said in the Scriptures, to have experienced any change in consequence of that event. But if the supposed impetuous torrent excavated valleys, and transported masses of rocks to a distance from their original repositories, then must the soil have been swept from off the earth, to the destruction of the vegetable tribes. Moses does not record such an occurrence. On the contrary, in his history of the dove and the olive-leaf plucked off, he furnishes a proof that the flood was not so violent in its motions as to disturb the soil, nor to overturn the trees which it supported; nor was the ground rendered, by the catastrophe, unfit for the cultivation of the vine. 
Viewing, in connection, these differences between the Mosaic history and these interpreters of the phenomena of nature, it seems impossible to admit, that, “ as far as it goes, the Mosaic account is in perfect harmony with the discoveries of modern science.” The reverse appears rather to be the case. It is well known, that Linnaeus declared that he saw no examples in nature of the ravages of a universal flood and this opinion has given offence to several well disposed friends of revelation, who have, nevertheless, formed their notions of the deluge from the speculations of geologists, instead of the records of Scripture. I confess that I entertain the same opinion as Linnaeus on this subject ; nor do I feel, though a clergyman, the slightest reason to conceal my sentiments, though they are opposed to the prejudices which a false philosophy has generated in the public mind. I have formed my notions of the Noachian deluge, not from Ovid, but from the Bible. There the simple narrative of Moses permits me to believe, that the waters rose upon the earth by degrees, and returned by degrees ; that means were employed by the Author of the calamity to preserve pairs of the land animals; that the flood exhibited no violent impetuosity, neither displacing the soil, nor the vegetable tribes which it supported, nor rendering the ground unfit for the cultivation of the vine. With this conviction in my mind, I am not prepared to witness in nature any remaining marks of the catastrophe, and I feel my respect for the authority of revelation heightened, when I see on the present surface no memorials of the event. On the other hand, had I witnessed every valley and gravel-bed, nay, every fossil bone, attesting the ravages of the dreadful scene, I would have been puzzled to account for the unexpected difficulties ; and might have been induced to question the accuracy of Moses as an historian, or the claims of the Book of Genesis to occupy its present place in the sacred record. Instead of finding the Deity setting his bow in the cloud, as a pledge that he would not again visit the earth with a flood, and as the only natural token of what had happened; I had expected to And a reference made to every diluvian heap of gravel, and every valley of denudation, as a memorial of that wrath which was displayed, while visiting rebellion with death. 
In other words, if the geological creeds of Baron Cuvier and Professor Buckland be established, as true in science, then must the Book of Genesis be blotted out of the records of inspiration. 
But as I believe in the authority of the Mosaic history, and see, in the opinion of Linnaeus, a strict conformity therewith, in letter and spirit, I may perhaps be asked, How can I reconcile the phenomena of nature, as interpreted by these geologists, with the view which I have embraced? I have already, in my first paper, declared, that “ the works and the words of God must give consistent indications of his government, provided they be interpreted truly.'” It has been announced, that the Mosaic account is in perfect harmony with the discoveries of modern science, though we have pointed out & palpable disagreement Perhaps a similar difference may exist between these supposed discoveries of modern science and the phenomena of nature. Our attention 
will now be directed to the determination of this important point, involved in the second question we proposed to discuss. As now to be examined, it is one exclusively of a scientific character, in which all our appeals must be made to the facts established by observation or experiment. 
II. Does the character of any of the members of the “ Modern Strata ,” demonstrate the occurrence of a Universal Flood as , exclusively , the agent in their formation ? 
The progress of truth, in this branch of the inquiry, must necessarily be correlative with our knowledge of the “ modern strata,” and the causes which have operated in their production. Whether a sufficient degree of knowledge has been acquired, or sufficient attention been bestowed on the subject by British geologists, I leave to the determination of the unprejudiced. 
Enough, in my opinion, seems to have been secured to enable us to solve the question under consideration. 
Various conjectures have been offered by different geologists, respecting the origin of the waters of the deluge. Some are disposed to consider the waters of the earth as sufficient, if once set in furious motion. A few look to a sudden change in the Earth’s axis as the origin of the catastrophe, in the absence of all proof from the science of Astronomy. Some consider the waters as having been set in motion by the attractive force of a comet, without previously gaining an affirmative answer to the question, Has a comet this attractive force ? There is abundant proof that the planets disturb the comets, but the converse is not known. 
The comet of 1454 eclipsed the Moon ; while that of 1770 not only came near the Earth, but passed through the midst of the satellites of Jupiter, without producing any sensible effects. 
Others, translating the phrase of Moses, 44 the windows of Heaven,” as literally meaning 44 a comet’s tail,” have considered the water as added to the Earth. I would be disposed, before admitting this view of the matter, to ask, Is the vapour of a comet’s tail aqueous ? — The following phenomena, however, bear more directly upon the question under discussion. 
1. Excavation of Valleys. — Valleys, in the opinion of the supporters of the diluvian hypothesis, may have been produced by different causes, such as irregularity of deposition, or subsequent dislocations of the strata. But those which exist in rocks nearly horizontal, “must be referred exclusively to the removal of the substance that once filled them ; and the cause of that removal appears to have been a violent and transient inundation.” Valleys of this kind have been designated by the very inappropriate term, “Valleys of Denudation,” as if they had been only exposed , not formed , by the catastrophe. Many circumstances seem to oppose the diluvian hypothesis, in reference to the origin of valleys ; among which, the following may be noticed. 
a. Shape of Valleys. — The valleys of denudation are not always straight in their course ; they have their salient and re-entering angles, their lateral branches, and their increase in width as they descend. When we look at a valley, at present forming, by the action of running water, in beds of clay or gravel, we witness the sinuosities of its banks produced by the oscillations of the stream at the bottom , now transporting the materials from one side, then from another, and thus aiding the force of gravity in causing the loose matter of the bank to descend. The lateral branches are produced by a similar process ; and the valley widens as it advances, by the increase of its waters from the lateral streams, and the consequent increased transporting power. I am in the habit of employing an old-fashioned logic, and comparing small things with great, referring analogous phenomena to the same cause, and proceeding from the distinct to the obscure. 
Under the influence of these principles, I feel myself compelled to conclude, that the old valleys, with the characters described, have been produced, like those forming under my eye, by the long-continued action of running water at the bottom. How a sudden, transient and universal flood, covering the highest hills, could have produced these effects, I cannot conceive. The main branch must have been first scooped out ; then the subordinate lateral branches, in succession ; and a current in the main branch following each, to clear away the rubbish. Had the lateral currents been flowing simultaneously with the principal one, a bar would have been formed at the mouth of each branch ; and if there had been no succession of currents in the main trunk, it would have been filled with the materials of the lateral branches. 
To those who have studied the natural history of rivers, especially their junctions with other rivers or with friths, the force of the objection will be obvious. 
It has been objected to the theory of the excavation of valleys by running water, that now no water flows through them. But water may have flowed through them, though now absent. The bursting of a lake, at a higher level, may have cut off the sources of several springs, and directed water through a distinct and very different channel from that in which it formerly flowed. 
b. The Impotence of Water as an Abrading Power . — The advocates of the diluvian hypothesis, have, in their zeal, committed that mistake intimated by the schoolmen, “ Causam assignare quae causa non est.” It is impossible to form an adequate conception of all the effects which might result from a violent and transient inundation, covering the highest hills, and sweeping whole continents with destructive fury. The mind is lost in the vastness of the operation, and the imagination is left, unfettered, to pursue its reveries,— a most bewitching predicament for a geologist. But we may make an approach to the subject. When a river is in a violently flooded state, we witness it remove the soil which opposes its current, transport to a lower level the loose blocks of rock, and sweep away the animal and vegetable productions occurring in its course. But it is subject to certain limitations. Throughout its course, its velocity is greatest at the surface and the middle of the stream, from which it diminishes toward the bottom and the sides, where it is least. When it enters a hollow, lake or mill-pond, the water below the outlet has its motion checked, and, in its state of comparative stillness, permits the heavier materials it had transported to subside. When a water-spout descends almost in a solid column of great height, and exerting, consequently, a pressure well calculated to remove obstructions, it penetrates the soil, and disperses it, along with the vegetable covering, removes the loose blocks of stone, and the surrounding detritus, while it makes but a feeble impression on the solid rock. When an alpine lake bursts its barriers, it acts precisely as a river in a flooded state ; carries along with it soil, loose rocks, trees and animals, depositing at a lower level the wrecks of its course, — as happened in the Val de Bagnes, by the bursting of the lake of Mauvoisin. 
Let us now suppose a body of water (no matter at present whether fresh or salt), of sufficient height to cover the highest mountains, and possessing a progressive motion of great velocity, suddenly to arive at the north of Zetland, traverse the kingdom, and pass off towards the south, at the Land's End, What would be the accompanying phenomena ? The soil would be everywhere annihilated in its progress, and, as mud, transported to a distance. The animal and vegetable inhabitants would be floated off. All detritus, boulders, and loose blocks of rocks, would, at the onset, yield to its pressure and velocity. But every lake, every valley, every lee side of a hill, every frith and bay of the sea, would speedily be in a state of comparative stillness, and receive the largest and the heaviest of the transported blocks. In the bottom of valleys and lakes we should now find the wreck of the catastrophe. But, have we the shadow of evidence to warrant the conclusion, that this inundation could tear up solid rocks, and make excavations in undisintegrated strata? No.

The force of cohesion, or rather crystallization, is more than a match for water falling from any conceivable height, or moving with any known velocity. The numerous islands which occur around our coasts, even where most exposed, and the cascades so common in the hilly districts, attest the absence of this abrading or excavating power. Did it possess this power, the Straits 
of Dover and the Pentland Frith must by this time have become unfathomable ; Niagara should have ceased as one of the wonders of the world, and wooded valleys should have occupied the place of the Canadian lakes. 
While I deny to water this abrading power, because the whole history of rivers is in opposition, I willingly admit its transporting power after disintegration has taken place,— a distinction to which the student in geology would do well to take heed. 
c. The Terraces in Valleys . — In many valleys, on the Continent of Europe, in this country, and in America, terraces occur in the banks, which, from their horizontality, indicate their production by water at the period these valleys were lakes. Several terraces may be traced in some valleys, and these, according to Professor Buckland, shew the number of successive stages by which the bursting of the gorge took place. 1 ’— (Rel. DU. 217.) In Lochaber four such terracesoccur, shewing four successive eruptions. These terraces, however, are declared to be “all of post-diluvian origin.” — (lb.) Whatever be the era of these terraces, they demonstrate a few truths, which cannot be very agreeable to the supporters of the diluvian hypothesis. Many lakes formerly existed, where valleys now occur ; and there are agents in Nature capable, at different intervals, of opening the barriers of these lakes, and permitting the water to escape suddenly. Such lakes and such agents may have existed before the flood. Each bursting must have resembled a deluge in its effect upon the district through which the waters passed, and the wrecks which it would accumulate at the lower level. When, therefore, we witness a valley, the present waters of which empty themselves by a narrow gorge, how are we to determine whether that gorge has been opened before the deluge, at the deluge, or after the deluge? The Vale of Pickering, in Yorkshire, may be taken as an example. According to Professor Buckland, it was an ante-diluvian lake (it would have been, from its characters, a valley of denudation, had it not been necessary to have a sheet of fresh water for the antediluvian hippopotami to swim in) ; the deluge opened the gorge at Malton, and converted it into a postdiluvian valley. But it is just as probable that it was a postdiluvian lake, and that the gorge of Malton was removed by an agent, similar to that which opened its northern neighbours in Lochaber. 
When we see a valley, the waters of which flow out at a gorge, we may infer that it was formerly a lake. We may also infer that a sudden deluge could not tear away the barrier rocks, unless previously disintegrated ; and we may watch the transporting power of the present stream : but if we have any geological caution, we will hesitate about fixing the era of the change. 
These terraces are found in greater numbers in alpine districts, as might have been anticipated. They occur, however, even at low levels. I have already noticed three examples in this Journal, and I have more to produce. They are much more numerous than is commonly imagined. Even in the valley of the Thames there is reason to believe they exist, though this hollow is pronounced, by Professor Buck land, a valley of denudation.  

Mr Greenough, a strenuous supporter of the diluvian hypothesis, has stated in his Geology (p. 121.), that “the valley of the Thames, in London, is contained in that of which Clapham Rise forms part of the boundary on one side, and the Green Park on the other ; and this,, again, is contained in the larger valley, which occupies the interval between Highgate and Sydenham. 
Arrived at these points, we find our horizon bounded by a chalk ridge still loftier.” These included valleys throw great light on the history of the globe. They are like the circular valleys in river courses : they mark some of the features of a former state of things ; they assist us in tracing the changes which have taken place, and even the agents concerned in their production : but they give us no dates. 
11. Formation of Gravel Beds .— The materials of which these beds consist, appear, in general, to be rounded blocks of rocks, confusedly mixed together, or presenting but indistinct marks of stratification. The blocks are seldom angular, and never exhibit the surfaces or edges of a mass recently detached from an undisintegrated rock. As these masses are supposed to have been derived from the rocks which the geological deluge tore from their beds during the excavation of the valleys, we might expect to find them exhibiting numerous instances of tolerably fresh-fractured surface, and the edges and corners still nearly entire. But when we find the reverse of all this generally to be the case, we must draw the conclusion, that the fury of the agent, which collected the contents of these beds, was chiefly expended on the loose and weathered blocks on the surface. This is a fact of some value, especially when viewed in connection with other characters exhibited by the gravel. 
The clay or loam associated with the gravel, according to Professor Buckland, “possesses no character by which it is easy to ascertain the source from which it has been derived, but usually varies with the nature of the hills composing the adjacent districts.”  On the supposition that this loam was derived from the finer portions of the soil and detritus removed by the waters of the deluge, we might expect that it would possess something like a common character, not in England only, but over the globe. But when we see it vary with the nature of the neighbouring hills, and consequently with the soil and detritus which they produce, we are irresistibly led to infer the operation, not of a universal, but of a local agent.  The rolled character of the gravel is fatal to the supposition of a sudden and transient inundation, acting upon fresh portions of dislocated strata. The circumstance of some of the blocks having travelled from a distance, is equally satisfactorily explained, on the supposition of a partial flood, occasioned by the bursting of an alpine lake, as by a sudden and universal flood. We can scarcely, however, avoid asking the question, Would not a general flood, raging violently, have produced gravel, of so confused and mixed a character, as 
to render it difficult to trace the origin of its materials ? This local character, though apparently hostile to the diluvian hypothesis, is of importance to society in an economical point of view. 
Norway has suffered much from this transient flood, for, according to Professor Buckland, pebbles of her rocks have been carried to England. But our country has been more highly favoured. Had it been otherwise, instead of gold reposing at the base of the Leadhills, or stream-tin in Cornwall, they had been resting far from their birth-place; probably, if the deluge was from the north, in the bottom of the Bay of Biscay. 
There is one character exhibited by the boulders in the gravel, of a truly interesting kind, in a theoretical point of view,— the intervention of valleys between the rocks from whence they came and the station they now occupy. It seems to be admitted on all hands, that these valleys did not exist at the period of the transportation of the gravel. Mr Greenough declares, that the blocks of granite on the Jura attest the non-existence of the Lake of Geneva at the time of their transportation. If, then, we consider the gravel as diluvian, the valleys must be regarded as postdiluvian ; or, if we consider the valleys as having been formed at the deluge, then the beds of gravel must be regarded as antediluvian. Professor Buckland has endeavoured to avoid the admission of these conclusions. It seems probable that the first rush of these waters drifted in the pebbles within the great escarpment of the oolite, and strewed them over the then nearly continuous plains ; and that the valleys were subsequently scooped and furrowed out by the retiring action of these same waters.” Is it conceivable that this sudden, transient and impetuous deluge, should have transported, in its first rush, various kinds of boulders, ten, twenty, or hundreds of miles, strewed them over nearly continuous plains, and then proceeded to scoop and furrow out numerous, deep and extensive valleys in these plains, whilst it permitted the deposits of its first rush to retain undisturbed possession of the station to which they were first brought ? Could I bring my mind to assent to such statements, I should claim to rank with Judaeus Apella. But the difficulty does not end here. In these valleys, supposed to have been excavated by the retiring waters, extensive depositions of gravel occur. This last circumstance, which is far from uncommon, marks a third epoch in the history of valleys and gravel. In the first period, the gravel was transported across continuous plains. In the second, valleys were scooped out. In the third, the bottom of these valleys received deposits of gravels. These facts intimate successive operations, executed under different circumstances, and seem fitted for leading to the inference, that some time intervened between the several changes. They certainly do not support the conclusion, that the three phenomena had their origin in the same sudden and transient inundation. Under all the circumstances of the case, the young geologist will feel himself without a guide, and without a test, in determining the sera of the formation of a bed of gravel. 1. It may be antediluvian, produced by the bursting of a, lake (for lakes must have been numerous, indeed, and extensive, before the excavation of so many gorges and valleys by diluvial action), spreading its wreck on nearly continuous plains. £. It may be the result of the first rush of the diluvian waters, previous to the formation of the valleys of denudation. 8. It may be the wreck of these valleys, produced during the tumult of the retiring waters. 4. It may be the result of the very last effort of the flood, to fill up the frightful excavations it had produced in the fury of its retreat. 5, It may be postdiluvian, and the result of the bursting of an alpine lake : and this gravel may have been deposited at very distant intervals. On the banks of Glenmornaalbin, diluvium may occur, referable to four different burstings of the Lochaber lakes, and all of them prior to human record. The diluvium of Martigny, from the bursting of a lake, was formed in 1818. When all these probabilities are taken into consideration, few, who generalize with ordinary caution, will feel inclined to refer to one sera the formation of all our irregular beds of clay and gravel. 
Independent of the depositions of confused portions of gravel and loam, there are likewise extensive depositions of sand, and gravel, and clay, of the same materials as the so-called diluvium ; but which, by being divided into beds and strata, indicate a subsidence from water in a state of comparative stillness. The characters of these beds seem to have been in a great measure overlooked by the advocates of the diluvian hypothesis. It is not probable that such beds could have been produced by a sudden and transient flood, which, in its first rush, transported “Norwegian pebbles” to the plains of England ; and, by the impetuosity of its retiring waters, scooped out the Solway Frith, the English Channel, and the Lake of Geneva. On the other hand, a lake at a high level, bursting its barrier, and carrying the wreck into a lake at a lower level, would give origin to stratified gravel, sand and clay, such, for example, as may be seen in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and on the south bank of the estuary of the Tay ; and which lower lakes have in their turn been drained. 
The last character which I shall notice belonging to those beds of loam and gravel supposed to have been formed by the deluge, is the presence, exclusively, of the remains of land animals. 
This fact is supported by the testimony of Professor Buckland, in his 44 Inaugural Lecture'’ and “Reliquiae Diluvianae ;” by Mr Greenough in his “Geology ;” and by Mr Conybeare in the “Geology of England and Wales.” This character yields a demonstration, that the water, which in its fury produced or transported this gravel, passed over apportion of the Earth’s surface, on which dwelt land animals, and that a flood from the sea had not been concerned in the phenomena in question. To the matter confusedly brought together by this flood or floods of fresh water , I have, in my second paper on the “Modern Strata,” given the name of Lacustrine Diluvium. Had a sudden, universal and transient deluge been the agent concerned in its formation, then should we have looked for the remains of the animals of the sea , mingled in sad disorder with those of the land and the lakes; or rather fishes, shells and zoophytes, where we now find the wreck of land animals. Even the peculiarities of the remains of the land animals stand opposed to the geological deluge as it has been interpreted ; for these belonged to individuals, which, according to Professor Buckland, lived and died in the regions where their remains are now found, and were not drifted thither by the diluvian waters from other latitudes. 
It is impossible for me to form a conception of a sudden, violent, transient, and universal flood, which transported Norwegian pebbles to England, yet did not bring along with these a few carcases of the truly arctic animals, such as the white bear ; neither floated off to Africa the land animals which were browsing on the continuous antediluvian plains of England. To me it is equally inconceivable, that the inhabitants of southern and tropical countries, were not drifted northwards, and a few of them left in England by the agency of the retiring waters. Yet our diluvium contains not the productions of the polar or equatorial regions, but exclusively the remains of the early inhabitants of the British soil. This character furnishes another demonstration, that the agent or agents concerned in producing the diluvium, must be regarded as having possessed only a limited or local authority. We must be careful here, not to confound with “ Lacustrine Diluvium,’ deposits on which I have 
bestowed the title of “Marine Diluvium.” Portions of this diluvium have been formed within the period of authentic history ; other portions are of earlier origin. The bones of land animals may occasionally be expected to occur in this formation, as the inundations of the sea, by which it has been produced, might have mixed with the spoils of the deep the relics of the dead, or living terrestrial inhabitants which it met with in its progress. 
3. Mud in Caves.— In the celebrated cave at Ivirkdale, there is a layer of mud in the bottom, inclosing the fossil bones, and over this bed there is a covering of calcareous stalagmite. Professor Buckland considers the bones to have been carried in by hyenas as their food, when they dwelt in this den anterior to the deluge ; that the mud was introduced by the waters of the deluge ; and that the stalagmite is decidedly postdiluvian. 
Another explanation is offered by the same author, of the mud and bones which occur, nearly filling several caves in limestone rocks at Plymouth. Instead of having recourse to hyaenas as carriers of the bones, he says. The safest way of proceeding, in such circumstances, is to endeavour to discover some analogous phenomena, the history of which is not involved in obscurity, and apply the explanation which offers itself in the last cases to the illustration of those which are more ancient and obscure. Fortunately such cases are accessible. In Wokey Hole, in the Mendip Hills, a cave occurs with lateral chambers ; mud likewise occurs ; and in this mud are found human bones, and a piece of a sepulchral urn. These hones are said to be “ very old, but not antediluvian.” 
Where is the proof ? or how are we to distinguish between antediluvian and postdiluvian bones ? The mud, too, is evidently fluviatile, and not diluvian. How are we to distinguish between fluviatile and diluvian mud ? Not by their contents, for bones are present in both. Not by a difference in juxtaposition, for both occur in caves with the floor as their bed, and stalagmite as a covering. The evidence, however, of the mud being fluviatile, may be considered as complete, as the spot on which it rests is within reach of the highest floods of the adjacent river. 
It may thus be assumed as a fact, that local inundations or floods are capable of conveying mud into caverns, and depositing it on their floors, under circumstances perfectly analogous to the so-called “diluvian mud,” and of surrounding “postdiluvian bones” as the diluvian mud is supposed to have surrounded antediluvian bones.” In another cave in the same neighbourhood, numerous bones and skulls of foxes were found. It is likewise stated by Professor Buckland, that, at a little distance from the Cliff of Paveland, u is an open cavern, to which it is possible to descend only by a ladder, and which, like the open fissure at Duncombe Park, contains at its bottom, and in the course of its descent, the uncovered skeletons of sheep, dogs, foxes, and other modern animals, that occasionally fall into it and perish.” In reference to these natural pitfalls and accumulations of bones, the learned professor offers the following sensible observations. The bones in caves may have been drifted in from open fissures at a high level by water, whether in the character of a local or extended inundation ; and the mud may be referred to a similar origin. But, in all this, there seems no ground to infer the exclusive agency of one sudden and transient deluge, when causes still exist, though of a more humble kind, adequate to produce the phenomena. 
The cave of Kirkdale does not present any appearances, warranting an explanation different from that which applies to acknowledged postdiluvian fissures and caves. The rounded cavities in the bottom of the cave, resembling, according to Mr Young, “such water- worn hollows as we see in rocks, in the beds of rivers, or on the shores of the ocean, - ” prove, that, at a period 
antecedent to the introduction of the bones, this was a fissure in the limestone traversed by a subterraneous river. This is rendered more than probable, by the numerous other fissures existing in the same bed, into one of which, in the immediate neighbourhood, the Rieal Beck enters, and for a certain space becomes a subterranean river. We have here, therefore, an agent capable of bringing in the mud and bones from higher fissures, if such existed, and depositing both in their present situation. The existence of such fissures cannot be doubted, since Professor Buckland has made the concession. But are there no open fissures in this bed of limestone still existing, as natural pitfalls for modern animals, and furnishing intimations of the former state of the district ? In Duncombe Park, in the immediate neighbourhood, and in the same limestone rock, there is at present an irregular crack or fissure twenty feet long, and three or four feet broad, which is almost concealed and overgrown with bushes, and which being nearly at right angles to the edge of the cliff, lies like a pitfall across the path of animals that pass that way. It descends obliquely downwards, and presents several ledges or landing places, and irregular lateral chambers, the floors of which are strewed over with angular fragments of limestone, fallen from the sides and roof, and with dislocated skeletons of animals that have, from time to time, fallen in from above and perished."” 
(Del. Dil. 55.) The fissure was found to to contain the skeletons of dogs, sheep, deer, goats and hogs.”  The bones lay loose and naked.” A local inundation flowing into the fissure would transport the bones to the lowest chambers, and leave them in the same circumstances as the so-called antediluvian bones. The evidence thus appears to be in favour of that opinion, which supposes that the bones in the Kirkdale cave tvere brought to their present situation from caverns at a high level, by the agency of warter, which deposited at the same time the mud in which they are imbedded. I say imbedded, because the mud does not appear simply to have filled up the interstices or layers of bones, but to have suspended and enveloped many of them. The present existence of pitfalls, and subterranean rivers in the same limestone, likewise gives strong probability to the infer- 
ence which -we have drawn, or rather would amount to a proof, provided there be nothing in the condition of the bones themselves, justifying the propriety of another explanation. 
The bones in the cave are chiefly fragments, and besides the small splinters, numerous portions of the ends, or the most solid portions of the larger bones, the jaw and teeth, occur. Some of these splinters are angular. These circumstances confirm the supposition, that the bones were drifted into their present position by water, especially when we keep in view, that the bones of the different species were found co-extensively distributed even in the inmost and smallest recesses. Professor Buckland, in endeavouring to establish his hypothesis, that hyaenas dragged in the bones in question, considers the rounding of the fragments as having been produced by the treading of the animals in the bottom of their den. His chief argument, however, is derived from indentations which are observable on some of the bones, and which he refers to the nibbling of the hyaenas while cracking the bones, in order to extract the marrow. Even admitting that these indentations have been produced by the teeth of hyaenas (an opinion not rendered even probable), still we would adhere to the explanation already given, since these markings may have been produced by hyaenas on the bones as they lay in the original pitfall, to which these depredators may have had access. In reference to the marks or pits on the ulna of a wolf and the tibia of a horse, occasioned, in the opinion of the Professor, by the canine teeth of an animal of the size of a weasel, he adds, “These pits must have been formed before the bone 
was imbedded in mud in the lowest recesses of the cave, and probably whilst it lay exposed in some upper cavity of the rock.” Why refuse to adopt a similar explanation of the larger markings on the Kirkdale bones. But, if the hyaenas carried in all the bones, it may be asked, why did they transport those of such small animals, as water-rats, weasels, rabbits, pigeons, snipes and even larks, — -animals, which to a hungry hysena, would not be a mouthful. But the difficulty increases when we consider, that, if the evidence is conclusive to prove that the hyena carried in the bones of the elephant and rhinoceros, and reduced them to fragments, it equally proves that the small bones of these animals were carried in by the same agent ; nay, more, that the hyena which gnawed the bones of an elephant, condescended to pick the flesh from a mouse, and separately break its jaws and legs. This would prove too much. 
The circumstance of Professor Buckland discovering some rounded pieces or balls, which he considers as the album grsecum or fecal matter of the former inmates of the den, at first sight strengthens his conjecture. Without venturing to give an opinion respecting this disputed matter, I may add, that, even viewing it as the fecal matter of hyaenas, it too could be carried in by a flood as easily as the os calcis of a water-rat, the jaw of a mouse, the ulna of a lark, or the shoulder-blade of a 
small duck. The evidence proving the Kirkdale cave to have been an antediluvian den, thus seems, in all its parts, so deficient in precision, as to warrant the rejection of that hypothesis it has been produced to support. 
In several caves (some in such circumstances occur in the neighbourhood of Kirkdale) the mud does not contain any organic remains. In such cases, the flood must have been truly local, or passed through caverns destitute of the skeletons of wild beasts. 
Though the mud in some caves is continuous, in other cases it is distinctly stratified, intimating its introduction to the cave at different intervals. The last circumstance which I shall notice connected with the mud in caves, is the absence of similarity of colour and composition in different districts. In the mud of the geological deluge, produced from the wreck of Norway and England, or rather of the whole surface of the earth, we might expect the exhibition of a common character in all caves. But when different caves have mud of a particular local character, the inference is obvious, that the causes concerned in its production have likewise been local. 
IV. Extinct Animals.— If ever a sudden, universal, and impetuous flood, sweeped our island in its fury, land animals must have been drowned and carried off. If we admit the truth of this statement, we should not expect in our country a single skeleton of a native animal, in our gravel, or loam, or in caves. Y et it is admitted that numerous relics of land animals, which lived and died in the country, are generally distributed in gravel, loam and caves. I am inclined at once to conclude, from these premises, that no such geological deluge ever occurred. Nor is other evidence wanting to justify the same conclusion. If these remains were drifted from other countries to those in which we find them, we may ask, from what countries ? Not from tropical regions, for the species of hyaena, elephant, and rhinoceros, the remains of which occur in our superficial strata, never were tropical animals, although from name the general reader may be betrayed to such an opinion. If these remains floated backwards and forwards by the flux and reflux of the mighty currents then in motion, before the carcases became putrid, and the bones fell piecemeal into the gravel, as the agitation subsided, then should we expect to find the relics of the animals of arctic, temperate, and tropical regions, mingled in the same gravel ; in other words, all the laws which regulate the physical distribution of animals would have been violated, and our gravel-beds would have been full of the monuments of the rebellion. Yet there is no such confusion ; consequently there have been no such mighty currents. 
Perhaps the most interesting fact in the history of the relics in our modern strata, is the occurrence in the same gravel of the bones of animals which have become extinct, with such as have been extirpated by the chase, and with such as still inhabit the country. This fact, while it throws great light on the early state of the animal kingdom, may be regarded as the deathblow of the diluvian hypothesis. The extinct animals were, according to Baron Cuvier and Professor Buckland, antediluvian, and perished from off the earth, by the destructive agency of the diluvian waters. The objection to this explanation is unanswerable. The diluvian waters must have drowned all land animals ; yet many which lived in the reputed antediluvian world, still live and flourish, in the same countries where the remains of their progenitors lie interred. I can find no attempt to explain these facts, except that, in the Reliquiae Diluviance , (p. 41.), there is mention made of certain species having “ reestablished themselves in the northern portions of the world since the deluge and by the same author ( Edin . Phil. Journ. No. xxiv. 308.), of others “ that have repeopled this country since the formation of the diluvium.” The history of this reestablishment or repeopling not being given, we cannot examine the value of the evidence adduced in its support. But we may ask, if the geological deluge ever took place, from whence did the modern animals proceed which repeopled the country ? If there was any place within the limit of the geographical distribution of our present animals which the diluvian waters did not reach, then it may be supposed, that, independent of the sudden and transient nature of the inundation, a place of refuge might have been found, to which these animals retired during the fury of the agitated waters, and from whence they might issue forth to repeople the desolated regions. But, the history of the geological deluge does not warrant such a supposition ; nor, even if it did, would the difficulty be removed. We could not avoid drawing the inference, that the place of refuge for the deer and the ox during the catastrophe, might have yielded protection to the gigantic elk and the mammoth. If any great inundation occasioned the extinction of these reputed antediluvian quadrupeds, its ravages must have extended to the other species having the same distribution, feeding in the same meadow, or browsing in the same forest.
Perhaps the abettors of the diluvian hypothesis may have recourse to the Ark as the place where the modern species found a temporary asylum. Still we have to ask the proof of the establishment of that law of exclusion , under the operation of which the mammoth and his unfortunate companions suffered extinction ? If these were not excluded, we have still to ask, what has become of the postdiluvian pairs and their families , of these now extinct species, since they outlived the deluge, but have since disappeared ? Under the conviction that the diluvian hypothesis did not explain the extinction of our early quadrupeds, and that the subject, even in the hands of Baron Cuvier, had not received the elucidation of which it was susceptible, I endeavoured, in my “Philosophy of Zoology ,” to establish the laws which regulate the Physical Distribution of Animals, as a preparation for studying the Revolutions” which had taken place in the animal kingdom. 
I there intimated, in general terms (for I could not spare room for more), the effects which the persecutions of man must have produced on the distribution of many species. At the request of any valued friend Professor Jameson, I extended these observations, in the paper on the “Distribution of British Animals ,” which appeared in the 2nd number of this Journal. 
Subsequent reflection on the subject has only served to confirm the views I have brought forward, and to convince me that we must refer the extinction of these early quadrupeds to the destructive influence of the chace. 
It is admitted on all hands, that the relics of the extinct quadrupeds, of those which we know to have been extirpated by man, and of those which still dwell in the country, are coextensively distributed, and must all have lived at the same time in this and analogous countries. From these premises, I may safely draw the following conclusions : — 1. That the cause of extinction was not a general physical one, as it did not extend successfully to the subsequently extirpated and recent species. 2. 
That the cause of extirpation has not extended successfully as yet to the existing species. From the evidence of our observation, and the testimony of history, confirmed by geological documents, I am warranted likewise in the following conclusions : — 1. Man is at present carrying on extirpating operations against many species ; nor is there room to doubt, that in any age he ever was 
otherwise occupied. 2. Different species vary in the extent of their resources to resist these extirpating efforts. 3. The imdividuals of many species have been greatly reduced in numbers by these efforts. 4. All the individuals of several species have been destroyed by these efforts, in this country, even within the last six or eight centuries. 5. If extirpation has taken place to such an extent, within the period of a few centuries, how manifold must have been its effects during the six thousand years that man has lorded over the creation. To such efforts do I ascribe the extinction of our ancient quadrupeds ; and the inductive reasoning which led me to the opinion, carries along with it all the authority of demonstration. To the explanation which has thus been proposed to account for the extinction of certain quadrupeds, several objections have been offered by Professor Buckland in his “ Reply (No xxiv. 612.) They seem, however, to have originated in imperfect notions respecting the “ Distribution of Animals and, therefore, readily admit of an answer. 
1. Is it not incumbent on him first to show at what period such animals as these, much too formidable to be overlooked, were ever known to have existed ?” I do not think the proof called for with propriety. The events referred to were not sufficiently striking to arrest the attention of the public ; and there were no Journals in those days.  2. Can he give any reason why hyaenas should have been extirpated at a more early period than wolves, had they ever existed in postdiluvian Britain ? Yes. Their resources against the efforts of the sportsman must have been fewer and less efficacious. The proof rests on analogy. The wolf has been extirpated, but the fox remains. The bear has been extirpated, while the badger remains. If we pass from Britain to the Continent, similar proofs occur. The gigantic elk has been annihilated, while the Scandinavian elk remains. If we pass from Europe to America, still there are proofs : the musk ox has perished in Europe, yet it exists in America.  3, Is it probable that the savage hordes which inhabited Germany before its occupation by the Romans, should have utterly destroyed such powerful animals as the elephants and rhinoceros, as well as the hyena, from the impenetrable fastnesses of the great Hercynian forest, when animals of the same kind have not yet ceased to abound in the woods of India, and the wilds of Africa, in spite of a farther persecution of nearly two thousand years ?” Quite probable. The objection is specious, not solid. Savages are good huntsmen ; and those which inhabited the west of Europe were not destitute of energy, as the Romans found to their cost. Those of temperate and cold climates, must follow the chase eagerly, Ceres to them being niggardly. They, too, can commit their depredations with greater effect, aided by the seasons, and the migrations consequent on the changes thereof. But independent of these explanations, I too may ask, How have the wolf, and the bear, and the beaver been extirpated from Britain, while, in the neighbouring continent, “ after a farther persecution,’ they still maintain their ground. The same explanation must apply to both cases, — the different facilities of the sportsman to gain his object. 
“ 4. Surely the theory of their extinction by the savage natives, preceding the Roman invasion of these countries, is a matter of the highest improbability ; their existence at that time, and subsequent extirpation, is, in the utter silence of Caesar and Tacitus, and all later historians, and even of tradition, a moral impossibility.” I deny that the natives were savages at the period of the Roman invasion ; and let the appeal be made to the writings of Caesar and Tacitus. The silence of the Roman historians as to the destruction of native animals is of little moment. The process of extirpation is gradual, and had commenced long before Romulus and Remus had a being, or the wolf that suckled them. The historians were otherwise occupied ; Caesar, in recording his own achievements, and Tacitus in lauding the deeds of Agricola, and fabricating speeches for Galgacus. As for tradition, the learned professor rejects the testimony of the Niebelungen, a poem of the 13th century, which seems to refer to these extinct animals, because it records, at the same time, some superstitious notions of the sera in which it was written. What will become of poor Samuel Johnson’s Tour a few centuries hence, with its second sight. There is not in the whole range of this question, a single fact, like the history of animals, yet produced, which justifies, or renders probable the diluvian hypothesis. The whole science of zoology is opposed to it. Nor is phytology friendly to the cause. If ever a mighty torrent of fresh or salt water committed those ravages on rocks and valleys, which it is represented to have done, the soil and land-plants must have been the first victims of its fury ; and in our gravel, lakes and peat-bogs, we should now find the woods of tropical forests commingled with those which temperate regions produced, as they floated backwards and forwards by the flux and reflux of the mighty currents then in motion, until they rested in the hollows of the surface, upon the retiring of the waters. The existence of land-plants, at present, on the surface, and the absence of the wreck referred to, attest the non-existence of this supposed catastrophe. Perhaps the plants have “re-established” themselves, and “repeopled” the 
desolated region ? Where was the spot in which they enjoyed exemption from the fury of the diluvian waters ? It must have been within the limits of their geographical distribution ; and as each district must have had a separate sanctuary corresponding to the distribution of the species, the mighty torrent must have met with many checks in its progress. It may be added, that the animals when they returned to repeople the valleys of denudation, must have been scantily supplied with herbage ; and centuries must have elapsed before the washed, waterworn rocks could furnish a support to the vegetable tribes. 
Perhaps the advocates of the diluvian hypothesis, in the absence of all support from physical science, may give it as their opinion, that the Deity, immediately after the catastrophe, created new soil, re-created the plants, and re-created a part of the species of animals which had been destroyed. Is not the silence of Moses fatal to the conjecture ? Would he have failed to record in the sacred volume this second magnificent display of creative power ? Perhaps, in this case, there is much need to 
be reminded of the caution of the poet. From the preceding statements, I feel myself warranted to conclude, that the occurrence of the geological deluge , in its effects, such as the advocates of the diluvian hypothesis describe, is, like similar well meant inventions of their predecessors, Burnet, Woodward, and Whiston, disproved by the truths of Geology, the truths of Zoology, the truths of Phytology ; and contradicted by the authority of Revelation. 

