It is customary with antiquaries in general, to delight to dwell on scenes which exhibit to their imagination the memorials of events nearly forgotten, or the transactions or customs of distant ages. Events of a more recent kind, or transactions which may be considered only in progress, do not arrest their attention, or at least fail to excite in their minds that deep interest which remoter subjects readily awaken. The public likewise feel and act much in the same manner. There is an importance attached to remote events, depending solely on their antiquity; while there is a vulgarity inseparable from recent events, founded on the supposition of their being well known.
Geologists have long acted, and we fear still act, in a similar manner to antiquaries. The study of the characters of the older strata (their position, structure, and ingredients), has been pursued with greater ardour than any researches which have been entered upon with the view of illustrating the connexions of the newer deposits. Coal, sandstone and limestone, have been examined with zeal, while few have bestowed their attention on peat, sand, or marl. Similar practices have prevailed with regard to organic remains. Many have speculated concerning the structure and habits of those relics which occur in the solid strata, who have not deemed the study of the laws which regulate the living races an object of much consequence.
We are not disposed to refer these well known habits of the antiquary and the geologist to any natural preference of the obscure to the distinct,—of subjects, the nature of which may be illustrated with certainty, to those, the relations of which circumstances have rendered us incapable of determining. We are aware that antiquarian and geological speculations are usually engaged in from motives of amusement, and, when conducted in the usual manner, seldom fail to gratify their votaries. Were they to commence their investigations, with a knowledge of recent events, and proceed by degrees to those of remoter times, their conclusions would assume a more imposing character, but the accompanying labour would be greatly increased. In speculating on the affinities of recent events, the understanding is ever occupied with facts; and the imagination, thus in trammels, dare not indulge in its licentious wanderings. But when remote events are the subjects of our contemplation, fancy becomes a valuable assistant, by reuniting disjointed links, supplying that which is wanting, and enabling the mind to arrive at conclusions, which, without the labour of investigation, had probably been long anticipated.
In Britain, there are many individuals, possessed of much zeal and sagacity, who have long been directing their attention to those organic remains which occur in the different regularly stratified rocks, and many important facts in their history have been satisfactorily established. More recently, public attention has been excited, in a remarkable degree, by the accounts which have been communicated of those singular remains of quadrupeds and birds found in many limestone caves, and loose depositions, which have been termed diluvial by several English mineralogists. These quadrupeds are supposed to have been destroyed by the last grand catastrophe that our planet has experienced, and which, in the opinion of many, is identical with the deluge of Noah. At this point, the researches of the geologist have terminated; and the truly interesting interval succeeding that period, and extending to the present time, has been neglected as too recent for inquiry or speculation. To us, however, it appears under a different aspect; and we trust that the observations which follow, will, to a certain extent, justify the propriety of our views, and even excite others, who are placed in more favourable circumstances, to contribute to the illustration of a subject, calculated to throw much light on the more ancient revolutions of our globe.
Man, whether we view him as a savage or a citizen, is induced, by various motives, to carry on a destructive warfare against many animals, which he finds to he his fellow residents on the globe. If we consider him as supporting his savage character, we witness the chase of the graminivorous animals, entered upon as a measure of necessity to supply the cravings of his appetite. He observes their habits, their haunts, and their migrations,—the hours at which they feed, the periods of their repose, and the season of the year at which they bring forth their young. Guided by his experience, he commences his attack with such effect, that the resources of the antagonist are generally insufficient to provide a defence, or secure a retreat. But he has other wants to provide for besides those connected with his supply of food. The skins of animals, with but little preparation, afford him comfortable clothing, a covering to his tent, or a water-proof casement for his boat; while their fat supplies fuel for his lamp, or an ointment for his skin.
The savage does not, however, confine himself in his hunting parties to the graminivorous animals. The carnivorous kinds are equally the objects of his anxious pursuit. Many of these dare to wage war with himself,—to dispute a track through the forest, or mountain gorge, or fearlessly and successfully rush into personal combat. The extermination of such opponents is pursued as a measure of safety. But the animals that thus readily make their prey of the savage himself, in company with many others, less powerful, pursue the graminivorous kinds, divide the prize with him, or bear it away. The savage thus carries on a war against the graminivorous animals, chiefly to procure food and raiment; while he no less zealously endeavours to destroy the carnivorous kinds, as endangering his personal safety, or interfering with the objects of his pursuit.
When man emerges from his rudest, or merely hunting state, to the pastoral condition of society, his attacks on the graminivorous animals are not less keenly or successfully conducted; while those which he has reclaimed by his sagacity require a great share of his attention. These have their natural provisions against danger greatly reduced by domestication j and consequently require for their safety the protection of their owners. To secure this safety, man is led to carry on a more vigorous war against all those carnivorous kinds which he formerly persecuted, and perhaps others which he now finds disturb or kill the young of his herds. If he rises from the pastoral to the agricultural state of society, he finds that the enemies of his fields are equally numerous with those of his flocks; that the catalogue of his foes has become greatly extended; and that he must assume the character, not merely of the master, but the tyrant of the soil.
The war which man thus carries on against the lower animals, is influenced, in a remarkable degree, by the progress of society. The wants of man increase in kind and variety with his advances in civilization, and his means of supplying them become proportionally numerous. The war carried on by rude tribes is limited in its objects, and uncertain in its results. But with the progress of experience and improvement, the objects of the chase cease to be limited, while the methods of capture, and engines of death, become more numerous, complicated, and effectual. The war is likewise influenced by circumstances of a local nature. In the warmer regions of the earth, the physical obstacles against which animals have to contend, are not so numerous as in the temperate and colder regions. There, too, man is not so intelligent or energetic. But in the higher latitudes, the changes of the season exercise a more powerful influence, and, at intervals, place animals within the reach of capture, which at other times are in comparative safety. Here, too, man, having a more scanty supply yielded him by the vegetable kingdom, is compelled to be more active in the chace, and the climate in which he resides fits him, in a peculiar manner, for hardy enterprize.
In attending to the checks imposed on the increase of many of the lower animals, we must view them, not merely as the objects of the continued persecution of the human race, but as equally exposed with man himself, to experience the depopulating influence of various physical changes,—the volcanic eruption or earthquake,—floods,—droughts—and epizootics. Severity of season and contagious disease may account indeed for the accumulation at one spot of more individuals of a species, or of different species, than the quantity of food produced by the district could be supposed capable of maintaining.
If we consider the dispersion of the human race over the earth's surface, (for to what spot has man failed to find his way?), and the unremitting persecution which they have carried on against the lower animals, during the long term of nearly 6000 years, varying their destructive weapons with the progress of improvements, and extending their ravages with the increase of their wants, we shall arrive at the conclusion that man must have altered greatly the geographical range of many species, and may even have succeeded in effecting the total destruction of a few. But we are not left to conjecture on this interesting subject. Though the preceding observations have been considered necessary to remove prejudice, and prepare the mind for examining the proofs which are about to be offered, they are only to be viewed as establishing the probabilities of the question. Numerous facts seem to offer themselves in illustration of the subject. Those connected with birds shall be first attended to.
The improvements which have taken place in agriculture, within the recollection of the oldest inhabitants of the country, and the extended use of fire-arms, have produced such remarkable changes on the haunts, the shelter, and the means of subsistence of many birds, as to banish from extensive districts several species which were formerly abundant. Eagles, Ravens, and Bustards, have entirely disappeared from the more cultivated districts. The haunts of the Mallard, the Snipe, the Redshank, and the Bittern, have been drained, equally with the summer dwellings of the Lapwing and the Curlieu. But there yet remain districts to which these species can resort, and continue to maintain their claim to be regarded as British subjects, though the limits of their residence have been greatly reduced. Others, however, have shared a different fate.
The Capercailzie or Wood Grouse, formerly a native of the pine forests of Ireland and Scotland, has been destroyed within the last fifty years. It still, however, maintains its station in the more extensive woods of Northern Europe and Asia. Those which survive in the Norwegian forests, are likely soon to share the same fate as the ancient inhabitants of our own woods, as numbers now find their way, during the winter sea
son, to the shops of the London poulterers.* Attempts, it is understood, have been recently made to restock our pine forests in the north with this noble bird from their continental haunts.
The Egret, which does not at present occur but as an occasional visitant, appears to have been plentiful about the middle of the 15th century. A thousand individuals are stated to have been used at the celebrated feast of Archbishop Nevill in the reign of Edward the Fourth.
The Crane, now equally rare with the Egret, appears, even so late as the days of Willoughby, to have occurred in abundance. Ray, when repeating the same observation, states their visits, (probably with greater propriety) to have been. Though these birds are now expelled from Britain, they still continue on the Continent of Europe and Asia, to maintain their existence, favoured by the great extent of waste ground, and the comparatively slow progress of improvement in society.
It may now be asked, If these birds have so very recently suffered expulsion from the British Isles, how many more species must have been extirpated since the Celt first took possession of the country, or even since the Roman armies were withdrawn? But on this subject we presume not to speculate, as we have neither documents left us in history, nor memorials in nature.
There are some circumstances connected with the known habits of the birds stated to have been served up at this feast, calculated to shake our confidence in the truth of its history, oral least in the accuracy of its historian. Woodcocks and cranes, as well as ruffs and quaills, appear in equal abundance, though the former visit the country only in the winter, the latter in the summer.
The influence of the progress of society on the species of British Quadrupeds will appear to have been equally extensive.
As furnishing articles of subsistence or luxury for the table, the efforts of the chase have been long directed against the three species of deer, with which the country formerly abounded. In the days of Lesley, the pursuit of the stag, fallow-deer, and roe, by means of blood-hounds and grey-hounds, constituted the noblest sport. And when he informs us, that from 500 to 1000 were sometimes slain at a hunting-match, we cease to be surprised at the diminution of the breed. Were it not for preserved forests, indeed, the native races would soon be extinguished.
The pursuit of several of our native animals, for the sake of their fur, has long been a favourite object with the hunter, and the articles of export which it has furnished have been deemed worthy of legislative enactments. The Otter, the Martin, and the Polecat, have in consequence been reduced within narrow bounds.
Noxious quadrupeds, or such as are injurious to the poultry yard, or the fold, as the Wild-Cat and Fox, have in like manner, in recent times, been greatly reduced in numbers. About the middle of last century, several fox-hunters, (by trade), were to be met with, each keeping a small pack of well-trained hounds, frequenting, periodically, different districts of the country, sojourning for a few days at the house of a farmer, where having destroyed the vermin of the neighbourhood, and received a small recompense in money, they departed to another quarter, where their services were needed and expected. But the hireling fox-hunter is not now a trade which the state of the country requires.* His employment has passed into the hands of gentlemen, and ceasing to be viewed as mean or vulgar, is entered upon with zeal, as an agreeable and athletic exercise. But, in some places, the objects of the sport have become so scarce, that it is necessary to import the victims from the yet half-reclaimed districts.
Badgers appear, likewise, at a former period, to have been more numerous than at present. There are several places, the appellations of which have the prefix Brock or Badger, attesting in the Gothic name the prevalence of these animals, and the Scandinavian power by which it was imposed.
The preceding quadrupeds have been merely reduced in numbers, and expelled from certain districts; others, however, have proved too feeble to support the war carried on against them, and do not at present exist in a wild state in the country. So early as the period of the Roman Invasion, the Britons appear to have paid great attention to the Horse, as a useful engine of war, as is attested by Caesar, in the description he gives of their cavalry, (Cas. Com. lib. iv. 33.) The excellence of the breed, even in the reign of Athelstan, may be inferred, from his prohibitory statute, preventing their exportation. At what period the wild breed became extinct, we have not the means of determining. If we are to credit Hector Boece, troops "equorum indomitorum" frequented Inverness-shire so late as the end of the 15th century.
Of the ancient indigenous Oxen of this country, two different breeds appear to have existed. The "vacca non cioures" of Lesley, (p. 10.) which frequented the mountainous regions of Argyle and Ross, were probably the parent stock of the present breeds of cattle, which yet preserve a considerable uniformity of character, in the more remote districts of the country. The "bovcs sylvestres" of the same author, remarkable for their white colour, with the muzzle and ears black, were, even in the days of Sir Robert Sibbald, (Sept. III. p. 7.) to be met with in many of the mountainous regions of Scotland. The remains, indeed, of this breed, are yet preserved in the parks of a few of our nobility. Our ancient historians give to the last varieties manes, confounding them probably with the aurochs of Germany (Bos Urus), a species, the claims of which to a place even in our extinct Fauna is doubtful.
The Wild Boar, once a native, abounded in the reign of Henry the Second, in the great forest then existing to the north of London, according to the testimony of Fitzstephen. In Scotland, the parish and family of Swinton owe their name to this animal, the former celebrated for harbouring, the latter for destroying them. The period of their extirpation is unknown.
The fur of the Beaver has ever been highly prized, and eagerly sought after. At the close of the 9th century, this animal had become scarce, and, by the 12th century, was only to be met with, according to Giraldus de Barri, in one river in Wales, and another in Scotland. If we may credit Boece, they were found in plenty, even so late as the 15th century. It was termed Llosdlydan by the Welch, in the 9th century, and, in the Highlands of Scotland its Erse name, Losleathan, still holds a place in the vocabulary of the Gael.
Among the noxious animals which have been extirpated by the efforts of the hunter, we may enumerate the Wolf and the Bear. The Wolf continued in Ireland to maintain its ground, so late as the beginning of the 18th century (1710), though it had been extirpated in Scotland thirty years before, and in England at a much earlier period. The Bear, which in Wales was regarded as a beast of the chase, equal to the hare or the boar (Ray. Syn.Quad. p. 214.), only perished, as a native of Scotland, in the year 1057.
To this extensive catalogue we might have added another, the Antelope, the remains of which, along with the bones of deer, boars, and beavers, were found in a peat-bog at Newbury, Berkshire.—Phil. Tran. 1757, p. 112. But there is no accompanying description, indicating to which of the two European species (A. Rupicapra or Siaga) it belonged.
From the preceding statements, we seem warranted to conclude, that the progress of society is exerting, and has exerted, a powerful influence on the geographical distribution of British animals. A few species, which formerly roamed through the woods, in freedom, have been reclaimed from a savage state, as the horse, the ox, and the boar. Others have been so persecuted by the sportsman, or disturbed by the farmer, that they have been compelled to retire to the more uncultivated and inaccessible districts, as a temporary asylum from their foes. While a third class, furnished with fewer resources, and exposed to a severe persecution, have perished from off the land.
The same effects appear to result from the progress of society throughout Europe, and, we may add, throughout the whole earth. The animals, which in this country have been driven to a corner, are, on the Continent, experiencing similar encroachments on their haunts. The animals which society, in this country, has succeeded in extirpating, have, in like manner, been banished from many districts on the Continents, and are daily becoming scarcer in those places where they yet maintain themselves.
These changes have all taken place in the course of the last six or eight centuries. In the ages which have preceded, the same causes must have been in more or less active operation, and the chasms produced in our Fauna, in consequence, may have been much more extensive, than, without due consideration, we are disposed to admit. But on this subject, the documents of history are unavailing, and the voice of tradition is silent. Nor need this excite our astonishment. The objects now interesting to us, from their scarcity, must have been uninteresting to the early inhabitants of this country, from an opposite cause. And the changes which we are so eager to investigate, would, from their being gradual, fail to arrest the attention of savage tribes. Fortunately, however, the silence of history, though sufficiently annoying, need not prevent us from conducting our researches into the changes of remoter times. Memorials remain, as unequivocal as those of history, attesting the revolutions which certain species of animals have experienced, once the cotemporaries of man, and the lower animals still his companions on the earth.
In our Peat-Bogs, we find the remains of those ancient forests, with which the country was clothed, even to a comparatively recent period, and in the marl beds which occur below, are preserved the memorials of those various animals to which these woods afforded shelter and nourishment. In these marl beds, the recent formation of which is not disputed by any class of geologists, are occasionally found the bones of the horse, ox, deer, boar, and beaver, in company with the shells of those moluscous animals which are yet to be met with in almost every pool. Among these remains, some of the bones seem to have belonged to larger individuals than are to be met with among those varieties of the species which are known at present. This remark is particularly applicable to the skulls of the ox, and the horns of the stag, which frequently occur.
Were these skeletons the only memorials of the former inhabitants of the country, they would add nothing to the documents furnished by history. Their accompaniments, however, are of the most interesting kind. If ever other quadrupeds existed, and were extirpated by the chase, we may expect to find their relics in those very beds which have preserved to us the remains of such as history intimates to have been once indigenous. This circumstance would constitute the connecting link between the known and the unknown—the fabulous and heroic ages—the transition from the flint-pointed javelin and stone-hatchet, to the sword, the spear, and the musket.
In the marl bogs of Ireland and England, as well as of several places on the Continent of Europe, the remains of a species of Elk are found occasionally. This species is not known at present, in any country, in a recent state. It resembles somewhat the American elk, but seems possessed of characters intimating a specific difference.
A specimen of the horn of the fossil Rhinoceros, found in one of the marl pits at the loch of Forfar, (Wern. Mem. vol. iv. p. 582.) exists at present in the Edinburgh Museum; and we have been informed by Professor Jameson, that two other examples have occurred in Blair-Drummond moss, on the banks of the Forth. It is to be hoped that the skulls will yet be procured.
A Hippopotamus is likewise recorded by Lee, in his Natural History of Lancashire, as having been found under a peat-bog in that country.
These animals, formerly inhabitants of this country, have their remains preserved, not only in peat-bogs and marl beds, (deposits which, from the commencement of their formation to the present time, have experienced no remarkable geological change, and indicate the absence of any physical revolution which could occasion the death of the individuals now represented by these bones,) but likewise in the silt of our great rivers. In the valley of the Thames, for example, they occur in the regular stratified clay, sand, gravel, and peat. In Mr Trimmer's account of these remains, as they occur at Brentford, he enumerates the following animals, (Phil. Trans. 1813, p. 133.): hippopotamus in great plenty; two kinds of deer; two kinds of elephant; the ox; together with land and fresh water shells.
In the loose strata of sand, gravel, and clay, the remains of quadrupeds, such as have already been mentioned, occur in abundance. The Irish Elk has been found in such circumstances at Walton, in Essex. In many districts of England, the remains of the mammoth, rhinoceros, horse, ox, deer, hippopotamus, and hyaena, have been detected. In Scotland, two examples of the elephant have occurred; the first was found at Greenhill sandstone quarry, near the Water of Carmel, in the parish of Kilmaurs, Ayrshire, in January 1817. Two tusks and some small bones were found 17£ feet below the surface, imbedded in clay. The substance of the bed, at a distance from the remains, was of a light brown colour, but in its immediate neighbourhood it was of a dark brown colour, and emitted a most offensive smell. It has been stated, that several marine shells were found along with these relics, in the dark coloured earth; but the names of the species have not been mentioned, nor any specimens produced to justify the assertion. The second instance occurred to the workmen in digging the Union Canal. At the west park of the estate of Cliftonhall, in the county of Edinburgh, on the 18th of July 1820, a large tusk was found in a thick bed of clay, 15 or 20 feet below the surface, (76. p. 60.) In the same kind of clay or till, as it is provincially called, and at no great distance, viz. on the estate of Bonnington, Edinburghshire, the workmen, in excavating the canal, found a copper battle-axe, (Edin. Phil. Journ. vol. vi. p. 357.) It was imbedded four feet deep in the bed of clay, which was covered with seven feet of sand and nine of moss.
The strata in which these relics have occurred, are termed by Mr Bald "Old alluvial cover," and by many English mineralogists "Diluvium," in the belief that it was formed at the universal deluge. The proofs, however, of the propriety of the latter term, and of the hypothesis with which it is connected, have ever appeared to me extremely faulty. The partial occurrence of these strata, their limited extent, great difference of character in neighbouring districts, the presence of the remains of terrestrial animals, and the absence of marine exuviae, demonstrate that a "universal" flood, possessing the velocity which some have assigned to it, had no share in this formation. The phenomena which they exhibit, indicate a cause, partial, sudden, and transient, like the bursting of a lake. It is true, that many mineralogists assign to the waters of Noah's flood, a progressive motion in one direction (differing in character from tides), sufficient to tear in pieces beds of granite, excavate deep valleys, and deposite the spoils of the rocks of Labrador or Norway on the plains of England. They, however, admit, that it so far respected British productions, as neither to have floated into the Atlantic the quadrupeds which it drowned, nor the boulders of chalk which it produced, but permitted them to remain in the neighbourhood of the place of their birth. The direction of this impetuous current, so widely different in character from that which Moses assigns to the flood, is imagined by some to have been from the north, or, by others, from the west, or from the south, just as their preconceived notions dictated, and in the absence of all respect for the valuable Linnean rule, "The genus should furnish the character, not the character the genus."*
The relics of the animals which we have now been considering, are not confined to beds of marl or clay, but occur in fissures and caves in rocks. In the celebrated Cave of Kirkdale in Yorkshire, the bones of a species of hyaena, of tiger, bear, wolf, fox, weasel, elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, and horse, two species of oxen, three species of deer, a species of hare, rabbit, water-rat, mouse, raven, pigeon, lark, duck, and snipe, have been identified. These relics were imbedded in soft mud, and covered with calcareous stalagmites. The occurrence of the bones of hyaenas in great profusion in this cave, their excrement, the marks of their teeth on the other bones, left in small angular fragments, have led Professor Buckland, in his interesting work, "Reliqua DUuvianee," to conclude, that the cave had long been occupied as a den by this animal, which had carried into it the remains of its prey. The valuable notices which Dr Knox gives ( Wern. Mem. iv. 385.) of the habits of the Cape hyaena, in which he states, that the species never carries off the bones or carcases it preys on, into dens, have been supposed to be hostile to the conclusion to which we have referred. The objection would be formidable, if it applied to the individuals of a species, but is without force in reference to the species of a genus. Our knowledge of the habits of the hare would not qualify us for speculating safely concerning those of the rabbit, and the same remark applies to the raven and rook,—the swallow and sand martin. Each species possesses peculiar habits, and is influenced in its physical distribution by peculiar laws. The Kirkdale hyaena is a different species from those of Africa, and is now extinct. It may have had different habits; its physical distribution has been different. The dispersion of its remains throughout Europe, proves the latter; the appearances of the Kirkdale Cave, intimate the former.
 

In the Cave of Hutton, in the Mendip Hills, connected with an open fissure, the remains of the elephant, horse, oxen, two species of deer, skeleton of a fox nearly complete, large bear, and hog, have been discovered. In the caves at Plymouth, the skeleton and bonesof all the animals already mentioned, have occurred, and in such circumstances as to indicate that they had been washed out of an open fissure by some landflood, and deposited in confusion in the neighbouring caverns.
Professor Buckland, in his speculations concerning the antiquity of those bones found in fissures, and caverns connected with them, conceives them to have been drifted into their present position by the waters of Noah's flood; that the mud by which they are surrounded was a deposite from these waters; and that the stalagmite, covering the whole, is post-diluvian or recent. Several obvious circumstances render such an opinion untenable, among which one may be noticed, which occurred to the author himself. In the cave of Wokely Hole near Wells, at the southwest base of the Mendip Hills, bones and teeth of human subjects have been found, together with a fragment of a sepulchral urn. The mud was here present, as well as the stalagmite, but the mud is declared to be "evidently fluviatile and not diluvian," and the bones "are very old, but not ante-diluvian." It appears that a subterranean river runs through the cave, which may have deposited the mud during its highest floods. But why may not the mud in the Kirkdale Cave have been deposited by a similar agent? In a cave, likewise, in the Mendip Hills, at Compton Bishop, (Reliquce Diluvianae, p. 166 ), numerous bones of foxes were found, and fifteen skulls extracted. In an open fissure at Duncotnbe Park, (lb. p. 54.), the bones of dogs, sheep, deer, goats, and hogs, have likewise been found lodged.
In addition to these facts, it may be added, that in the fissure of the gypsum at Koetritz, in Germany, described by Baron Schlotheim. a translation of whose paper on the subject has appeared in the Annals of Philosophy, vol. xxi. p. 17., the remains of man, and several recent European quadrupeds, and even the domestic cock, occur along with the remains of the extinct rhinoceros, hyaena, tiger, Sic. "In Winter's gypsum quarry, human bones were discovered, at the depth of 26 feet from the surface, lying 8 feet below the bones of the rhinoceros, there also deposited."*
In the preceding statements, we witness British animals, in reference to the changes to which they are subject, capable of being arranged into three classes,—the first including those species, the individuals of which are daily becoming scarcer, in consequence of the agency of man,—the second, those which man has succeeded in extirpating, but which still find an asylum in the more thinly peopled or less cultivated districts of Europe,—while the third embraces those, which, though once natives of Britain and Europe, have ceased to exist in a living state on the earth. As connected with Britain, we may enumerate in the last class the elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, hyaena, cave-bear, tiger, and elk. To what cause, then, are we to assign the extinction of these animals: To the extirpating effects of civilization, or to physical revolutions, over which man had no control?
In order to solve this important problem, it is necessary to keep steadily in view the following conditions, which have been determined:
1 The remains of these extinct animals occur in company with those which have been destroyed or extirpated by human agency, and with such as still survive, and seem suited to the climate. Thus, the bones of the extinct elephant, rhinoceros, and cave-bear, occur along with those of the common bear, the wolf, the fox, and the horse.
2. The remains of these extinct animals are not found in any situation, such as caves, fissures, gravel and clay-beds, peat or marl, in which the relics of existing animals may not be placed, and have not been found.
3. The remains of extinct animals occur in situations, indicating the action of causes at the period of their burial, not now frequently in operation, as in thick beds of clay or gravel; and they likewise are found under circumstances, which prove, that no remarkable physical change was taking place at the time, nor has taken place at any subsequent period—as in beds of peat and marl. The same remark is equally applicable to the remains of recent and extirpated animals.
4. The extinct species have had a geographical distribution in Europe, similar to the recent and extirpated kinds with which their remains are intermingled. In considering the geographical distribution of animals preparatory to the investigation of their physical distribution, we should ever bear in mind the great changes man may have occasioned in the former. This will induce us to attach suitable importance to their fossil relics, as the indication of the extent of their former dispersion. But, when we find a great difference prevailing in physical distribution, between two animals referred to the same species, as the Siberian rhinoceros, and the recent African one, the skull of which was brought home by Mr Campbell, we should not infer identity but from close and extensive resemblances of structure.
5. The remains of these extinct animals occur only in the superficial strata, and in fresh-water gravel or clay, and may be viewed as connected with the last or modern epoch of the earth's history.
6. Man was an inhabitant of this country at the time these animals, now extinct, flourished, his bones and his instruments having been found in similar situations with their remains.
The natural history of these remains of extinct animals, demonstrates that opinion to be erroneous, which considers the deluge as having drowned these animals, while it formed the beds of gravel, clay and loam, in which they are now imbedded. If it drowned the hippopotamus, how did the ox and the horse escape? Why this partial selection of its victims among the ancient inhabitants of the country? Professor Buckland, who has defended the opinion which ascribes the extinction of these animals to the deluge, classifies the alluvial strata into such as are diluvian, and such as are post-diluvian. But these organic remains occur, not only in the so-called diluvian clay, but in the acknowledged post-diluvian marl; and this flood, instead of consigning indiscriminately to a watery grave all the quadrupeds of Britain, selected as the objects of its destruction only such as in all ages must have been most eagerly sought after by the huntsman, and such as his efforts would, long before this period, have annihilated. The whole circumstances of the case lead apparently to the conclusion, that the weapons of the huntsman completed the extinction of these animals, from the first ages the object of his persecution; though we can feel no hesitation in admitting, that murrains, severe seasons, and local inundations, may have accelerated their ruin. The destructive influence of these circumstances, must, indeed, in all ages, have operated in checking the extension of particular species; nor has man himself been exempt from their ravages. But as his resources multiply with the progress of society, while those animals against which he contends, become more exposed to his attacks, man has outlived these changes, along with those brute contemporaries which have not been the special object of his persecution.
The preceding remarks, offered on a very interesting department of the natural history of the earth, may serve to point out the rashness of those attempts which have been made to unite the speculations of geologists with the truths of Revelation. Without controversy, the works and the words of God must give consistent indications of his government, provided they be interpreted truly. The talent, sagacity, learning, and industry, occupied for ages with the Book of Revelation, have produced a mass of evidence, by which its moral authority has been established. But, unfortunately for the interpreters of the Book of Nature, they have been few in number, their 6eld of observation too limited, and their prejudices too obvious, to permit any high value to be attached to their theoretical deductions; as the history of mineralogical science in Britain for the last twelve years abundantly testifies. It would be favourable to the progress of geology, were its cultivators more disposed to examine the structure of the earth, and the laws which regulate the physical distribution of its inhabitants, and less anxious to give currency to their conjectures, by endeavouring to identify them with deservedly popular truths. It would be equally favourable to the interests of Revelation, were the believer to reject such faithless auxiliaries, and, instead of exhibiting a morbid earnestness to derive support to his creed from sciences but remotely connected with his views, calmly to consider, that Geology never can, from its very nature, add the weight of a feather to the moral standard which he has embraced, or the anticipations of eternity in which he indulges, even should he fancy that it has succeeded in disclosing the dens of antediluvian hyaenas, in exhibiting the skeleton of a rhinoceros drowned in the flood, or in discovering the decayed timbers of the ark. This indiscreet union of Geology and Revelation can scarcely fail to verify the censure of Bacon, by producing "Philosophia phantastica, Religioharetica.

