 Sir,
In answer to the inquiries which you made some time ago regarding the position of the claystone and porphyritic rocks in the neighbourhood of Dundee, I send you the following remarks, which I made, while walking along the shore of the Tay, from Invergowrie eastward to the town of Dundee.
In the bay at the old church of Invergowrie, the shore is level, and composed of gravel; but, on the east side of the bay, the rocks of sandstone form a steep precipice. This precipice is about thirty feet high, and continues nearly to Dundee, of the same height, independent of the variety pf rocks, forming a steep bank on the north side of the river Tay. In this bank, there are some important sections of the strata displayed, which I propose to describe.
Where the sandstone begins at the east side of the bay, it occurs in thin strata dipping to the northwest, at an angle of about 15°. This sandstone soon disappears, when a mass of porphyry forms the bank. Its western extremity is but indistinctly displayed; its eastern extremity is covered with sandstone. This porphyry has a slaty Structure in the great, is composed of a basis of compact felspar, and contains numerous crystals of common felspar, and a little basaltic hornblende. The sandstone soon gives place to the porphyry which rises below it, and forms the precipice of a considerable distance. East from the Boothe, there is a mass of sandstone interposed, as represented at fig. 2.
The porphyry, fig. 1., is disposed in strata about four feet in thickness. It is traversed by a vein containing calc-spar, brown-spar, and sparry-ironstone,—-minerals which are nearly related, both in their oryotognostic and geognostic characters. The line of junction between fig. 1. and 2. is indistinct. The other extremity of this mass of sandstone, rests upon the porphyry, fig. 3. In this last-mentioned porphyry, fig. 3., there is a basin-shaped cavity, fig. 4 which have been filled up with sandstone. The strata of sandstone are parallel with the inclined edges of the cavity. The same bed of porphyry farther eastward seems to rest on the sandstone, fig. 5.; but the appearances are indistinct.
The sandstone, fig. 5., rests upon the mass of porphyry, fig. 6. This last porphyry varies in colour and composition in different portions of the bed. Some portions are of a grey colour, with imperfectly formed crystals of earthy felspar, while other portions are reddish-brown, and contain besides the felspar a considerable number of crystals of hornblende. This porphyry soon gives way to another deposition of sandstone, both extremities of which rest upon porphyry, and exhibit an instance of an upfilling.
The last mass of porphyry, fig. 8., is again covered on its eastern side with another mass of sandstone. This sandstone includes a bed of greenstone, specimen 5.
From the place where the last bed of sandstone commences, to the place called the Crescent, the mineral appearances are but imperfectly disclosed, as may be seen in the figure, which, with the specimens, will convey all the information which I could obtain.
The specimen No. 5., is greenstone; its fragments sound like clinkstone. Specimen 6. is a greenstone abounding in felspar, in a state of decomposition. Specimen 7 is a soft claystone porphyry. Specimen 12 is a claystone-porphyry, with minute grains of sand.
Opposite the Crescent, the rocks disappear, and the shore becomes level. Here, however, a rock of greenstone appears rising among the rocks of the shore. It abounds with hornblende, and is in Some places amygdaloidal. Specimen 8 is from it.
Passing this mass of greenstone, the relations of which I could not ascertain, a bed of claystone, specimen 11., equally imperfectly exposed, makes its appearance on the shore. After passing this claystone, rocks of greenstone now form the shore, and continue without interruption to the town of Dundee. Specimen 10., is from this bed of greenstone. In the neighbourhood of the town, the greenstone seems to pass into clinkstone,—a transition, which, I think, I have observed in otheiplaces.
From the preceding description, it will appear that many changes have taken place in the position of these beds of sandstone and claystone since the period of their formation. But, of the cause of these dislocations or slips, we are entirely ignorant. The situation of the strata of sandstone in the basin-shaped cavity of the porphyry j makes us acquainted with a fact in the history of stratification, of the greatest importance. The abettors of the vulcanic hypothesis contend, that all the strata of rocks were originally deposited in a horizontal position. The fact before us, is in opposition to such an opinion. The strata in the bed of porphyry are nearly horizontal, whereas the strata of sandstone are highly inclined, being parallel with the sloping sides of the basin. If we suppose one of the sides of this cavity removed, and the inclined strata on the other side of the cavity left behind, a superficial observer would be ready to conclude, from such partial appearances, that these inclined strata had been moved into their present angular position by an ascending movement of the inferior bed of porphyry: Instances frequently occur to every practical mineralogist, where highly inclined strata thus rest upon the inequalities of the fundamental rock^ which, to all appearance, has never been moved. The disciples of the German school embrace the opinion, that " in strata composed of chemical precipitates, all the variety of inclination depends on the inequality of the bottom j" and in this they are confirmed) not so much by attending to appearances in small portions of rocks, such as here described, as by an examination of the structure of mountain masses. These few remarks certainly lead to little that is precise or important in the history of the strata, now described. They indicate, however, the intimate relation which subsists between the sandstone and the claystone. This relation, I had previously ascertained in my examination of the Island of Papa Stour; and the observations which I have recently made on the south bank of the Tay, tend still further to confirm and illustrate it. At Fliskwood, directly opposite to the north bank of the river, where the appearances detailed above are exhibited, the sandstone covers the claystone. Here the sandstone rests upon very soft clay-porphyry, which passes into claystone. This claystone at last becomes more compact, assumes the amygdaloidal structure, and then becomes connected with compact felspar.
These appearances seem to indicate the existence of a family of flcetz-rocks, consisting principally of claystone, felspar, and sandstone, the relations of which are but imperfectly understood.
Should these remarks appear to you sufficiently interesting, I beg of you to communicate them to the Wernerian Natural History Society, with my best wishes for its prosperity. I am, &o

