
THE county of Fife Contains two very distinct formations of rocks, which belong to the Flcetz class.
The country to the north of the river Eden, which runs through Fife in a direction of west to east, contains strata which are connected with the Old Red Sandstone, and are geographically related to the beds of sandstone, porphyry and greenstone,which I formerly described to this Society, as extending along the shore of the Tay, from Dundee westward, on the north bank of the river. The southern portion of Fifeshire, contains strata exclusively belonging to the Independent Coal Formation, and forms an interesting part of the coalfield which occupies the river district of the Forth. An overlying formation of Trap rocks, in the form of conical hills, or- irregular patches, covers the rocks belonging to these two formations, and may be observed to the south as well as to the north of the Eden. The city of St Andrew’s is situated on the north-eastern extremity of the district occupied by the strata belonging to the independent coal formation. The rocks which occur in the neighbourhood of the city, present a few circumstances in their history, which deserve-to be noticed. These I shall briefly detail.
    In conformity with the plan pursued by the disciples of the celebrated Werner, I shall state my observations on the rocks which are considered the oldest, and afterwards notice those which appear to have been deposited at a more recent period. The rocks, therefore, which fall to be considered first, are such as belong to the Independent Goal Formation.
    The strata in the vicinity of St Andrew’s, preserve no regular line of bearing. In a few instances, they are horizontal, but in general they present basin-shaped or saddle-shaped undulations the strata at the margins of these bendings, incline to the horizon at various angles. The rocks are chiefly Sandstone, Coal, Slate-clay, and Clay-ironstone.
    The individual beds are subject to great variation in depth. The beds of sandstone in particular, sometimes swell out to a considerable thickness, and farther on in their line of bearing, almost disappear. At a place called the Witch-Lake, a bed of sandstone rests upon a horizontal bed of slate-clay. The surface of the bed of sandstone suddenly swells out into a knob, and the slate-clay deposited over this inequality, is seen to rise at a considerable angle on each side in opposite directions, meeting at the top. The inspection of this appearance, will point out the cause of those bendings in the strata to the eastward of the city, and convince the observer, that no other circumstance is required to produce those wavings, than an uneven surface of the inferior beds, and that these inequalities of the surface have been produced by the unequal attraction exerted by the beds already formed, to the matter depositing over them. 
I.	Sandstone.
   The sandstone occurs in thick beds, which are distinctly stratified. The grains of quartz are sometimes very minute, and the sandstone is finegrained. In a few instances, the grains of quartz are large, and the sandstone approaches in characters to conglomerate. The cement of all the sandstones in the vicinity of the city, is easily acted upon by the atmosphere, and hence they are very liable to decomposition. I observed that those sandstones which contained much mineralized vegetable matter, were the most easily decomposed, and were frequently So friable, that they could be crumbled down between the fingers. The sandstone occasionally contains a little mica, and likewise mineral charcoal, and not unfrequently small globular pieces of iron-pyrites.
II. Coal.
   A few beds of coal occur in the beds of sandstone. These are, however, of trifling importance, very seldom more than a few inches, and never exceeding a foot in thickness. They are principally slate-coal, containing numerous petrifactions of reeds, flattened and compressed. Thin layers of pitch-coal also occur, both in the slate-coal, and also in the sandstone. In one of the largest beds of coal, I observed globular concretions of sandstone, having the thin layers of coal surrounding them on all sides. 
III.	Slate-Clay.
This rock occurs in beds of various thickness, and of every degree of hardness arid density. It passes distinctly into sandstone, by acquiring small portions of mica and quartz. It likewise passes into limestone and bituminous shale. It includes thin layers of sandstone, and often contains vegetable impressions.
    I think it proper in this place to mention a fact not generally known, That slate-clay forms a fertilizing manure to sandy soils, by supplying the requisite portion of aluminous earth. In the neighbourhood of Kirkcaldy, there are several fields of sandy soil which rest upon sandstone. To these fields, slate-clay and bituminous shale have beeii applied as manure, and with success: they were, previous to this application, unproductive ; they now yield good crops of grain and grass. To the west of St Andrew’s, there are extensive tracts of soil, principally composed of sand. Were the slate-clay, so abundant among the rocks in the neighbourhood of the city, spread upon these grounds, the most beneficial effects would result from the application. The ground would become firmer, the soil more retentive of moisture, and better able to resist the drought of summer. Ignorance and prejudice may prevent some from following the example of the farmers in the neighbourhood of Kirkcaldy ; but I have no hesitation in asserting, that its imitation in many places of the coal districts of Scotland, where such soils and such rocks abound, would greatly contribute to increase the food of man and beast.

IV. Clay-Ironstone.
   The common claystone occurs in beds from an inch to upwards of a foot in thickness. It contains a few vegetable impressions. The kidneyshaped sub-species, is likewise common. Both of these are included in beds of slate-clay. They are sometimes collected and sent to the Carron Iron-works but the quantity so procured, is trifling.
   In this place, I may take the liberty of observing, that the closet mineralogist may indulge in hypothetical speculations regarding the formation of minerals ; but such conjectures will never aid the cause of science, of make us acquainted with the secrets of nature. I have no doubt, but that Dr Hutton, upon examining a specimen of the Septarium iron-ore, was gratified with the idea of having found a convincing proof of the igneous consolidation of fossils, and regarded his explanation of the singular structure of that mineral as the only one which approached the truth. But we hesitate not to say, that had that ingenious philosopher ever attended to the natural history of the Septarium,—had he ever examined it in its clayey bed,—completely surrounded with matter which presented no marks of igneous influence,— he could not have avoided drawing the conclusion, that since the bed of slate-clay, which contains the septarium, presented no marks of the action of heat, the septarium contained had never been exposed to its influence.
    Having thus shortly given an account of the rocks belonging to the independant coal formation which occur in the neighbourhood of St Andrew’s, our attention will next be directed to a small portion of the Newest Floetz-trap formation which covers these rocks.
    In many places in Fife, overlying rocks of Basalt, Clinkstone, Felspar, Porphyry-slate, and Claystone, occur resting on the rocks of the old red sandstone, and the rocks of the coal formation. But it rarely happens that distinct sections of these rocks can be found, or the relations which they bear to one another ascertained. On the sea-shore, to the eastward of St Andrew’s, a portion of the newest floetz-trap occurs in such a situation that its geognostic characters can be ascertained with precision.
    This formation rests upon beds of sandstone, and the other rocks described above. It extends about 5OO yards along the shore, and is connected with a more extensive deposition of the same kind, which stretches inland, but whose history cannot be easily investigated on account of the thick continuous bed of soil with which it is covered.
V. Trap-Tuff.
   The principal rock of this formation is trap^ tuff, similar in composition to the rock of the same kind which occurs in Arthur’s Seat. It contains globular pieces of quartz and granite, which have been water-worn ;—likewise fragments of grey-wacke, floetz-sandstone, and limestone containing petrifactions of entrochi. Small pieces of augite and felspar are likewise contained in it. The inclosed fragments of the older rocks are sometimes of considerable size, measuring two or three entire feet.
   It generally happens, that the fragments of the oldest rocks, when observed imbedded in the newer formations, are much rounded and water-worn ; Whereas the fragments of the newer rocks, are rather angular, and seem to have suffered less from attrition :—a circumstance which points out with considerable precision the relative antiquity of rocks, and is entitled to a more careful examination than has hitherto been bestowed upon it.
   The most curious circumstance which attracted my notice, in examining this bed of tuff, was the rock, which is well known in the neighbourhood of St Andrew’s by the name of the Rock and Spindle, and from which it is distant about a mile and a half.
   This rock is about forty feet in height. Towards the base, there is a spherical concretion of basalt, in the form of five or six-sided lengthened pyramids meeting at the apex, giving to the mass a stellate appearance. The mass is likewise divided into concentric layers. The basalt contains crystals of augite, with olivine, and glassy-felspar. This concretion of basalt is surrounded with the tuff, into which it gradually passes; and must have been completely enveloped by it, previous to its partial wasting away by the action of the sea and atmosphere. It may be mentioned in this place, that the regular basaltic columns at the Ely, are a portion of a spherical concretion contained in trap-tuff. Here the concretion is only about ten feet in diameter : at the Ely it is several hundred feet.
   In other parts of the tuff, small masses of amygdaloid and basalt occur, leading directly to the conclusion, that the bed is partly a mechanical, and partly a chemical deposit, since these rocks imperceptibly pass into one another.
   If the regular forms of basalt induced Dr Hutton to conclude, that they furnished proofs of the action of a central heat, he would have found considerable difficulty in applying his heat to these inclosed masses of basalt, without fusing the bed of tuff which surrounds them.
   He who has the boldness to build a theory of the earth, without a knowledge of the natural history of rocks, will daily meet with facts to puzzle and mortify him.


