Additional Remarks on the Climate of the Arctic Regions, in Answer to Mr Conybeare. By the Rev. John Fleming, D. D. F. R. S. E. 
The remarks which I communicated in the April number of this Journal, "On the value of the Evidence from the Animal Kingdom, tending to prove that the Arctic Regions formerly enjoyed a milder Climate than at present," were not intended to offend any class of readers, and did not seem likely to provoke any angry discussion. My surprise was therefore considerable, when I found, in the following Number of the Journal, an " Answer" to my paper, by the Rev. Mr Conybeare, in which the author has betrayed a degree of irritation incomprehensible in the peculiar circumstances of the case, and has exhibited such a want of accurate information, sound judgment, and good taste, as to recall the character which Martin Lister gave of certain geologists in his day: —" It is to be observed (says he) where men are most in the dark, there impudence reigns most: they are not content fairly to dissent, but to insult every body else." Indeed the whole character of the paper differed so much from the estimate I had previously formed of Mr Conybeare's attainments, that I was disposed to indulge the hope that he would, upon due consideration, do himself justice by voluntarily avowing the mistakes into which he had been betrayed. His silence, however, has left me no other course to pursue, than the painful one of exhibiting him to the readers of this Journal in a light which will probably fill their minds with surprise, and perhaps his own with mortification.
In the paper which has given rise to this discussion, I attempted to point out the value of Analogy as an instrument of research in Natural History, and the danger arising to geology in particular, from confounding the terms genus and species. The important question which I proposed to solve, was thus stated:—" Supposing ourselves acquainted with the habits and distribution of one species of a genus, can we predicate, with any degree of safety, concerning the habits and distribution of the other species with which it is generically connected?" In order to proceed with due caution, I investigated the three following conditions:—" 1. If two animals resemble each other in structure, will their habits be similar? 2. If two animals resemble each other in external appearance, will their habits be similar? 3. If two animals resemble each other in form and structure, will their physical and geographical distribution be similar?" The numerous facts which were produced under each of these heads, justified the reply in the negative. When I read the title of Mr Conybeare's paper, " Answer," &c. I was at first struck with the boldness of the attempt to outargue demonstration, and did expect that he would have ventured on the examination of the different points I had discussed, and have endeavoured either to disprove my facts, or to combat the soundness of the conclusions which I had drawn from them. I regret to find, however, that it did not suit the tactics of my opponent to pursue so straight a course. He seems to have been aware of the impregnable nature of the positions which I had taken up, and wisely kept at a distance, resolved, however, to practise a little desultory skirmishing, to convince his friends that his spirit is not wholly subdued. To soothe his feelings, by giving him employment, I shall put a few light troops in the pursuit, ordering them to trace every step he has taken; fight him wherever he pleases to make a stand; and, should he offer to surrender, to give him honourable terms, not on account of his dignified conduct since the commencement of the campaign, but in consideration of his former good character, and the efforts he has made to restore the Eualio Sauri; but, above all, his connection with our esteemed ally, " The Geology of England and Wales."
The first paragraph of the " Answer," begins with what Mr Conybeare probably imagined I would value as a compliment, and ends with a sentence intended for condemnation. In natural history, I am styled " a diligent and meritorious compiler;" while, in geology, my " information is evidently extremely limited."
With the value or extent of my compilations from the works of naturalists, or from the book of Nature, Mr Conybeare is in ignorance, as the sequel will demonstrate; and he is in the same state with regard to my geological labours, or the extent of my collection of organic remains. Is it not probable that an individual who permits himself to praise or to censure an author whose works he has never read, may be equally dogmatical in reference to things he has not studied? I am censured, at the same time, for presuming to differ from Baron Cuvier, and from all the most eminent names in geological research. I did not expect that my tight to judge would have been called in question. When the page of Nature is accessible to me, I value the lesson which it yields; and, when backed by such authority, I dare to call nonsense by its true name, even when uttered by a Cuvier or a Conybeare.
My opponent feels himself obliged by the "interests of scientific truth,'' to object to my " estimate of the value of the evidence derived from the Animal Kingdom, as to the former temperature of the northern regions, as altogether insufficient and superficial." Doubtless it was unnecessary, on the part of Mr Conybeare, to have replied to such a paper, if the author had no authority, and his statements no weight; and still less necessary to make the reply as lengthened as the original, if all he had to destroy was " superficial." It seems, however, that this character attaches to my remarks, because I had been too much under the influence of the inductive philosophy. I had, it would appear, tried the value of the standard, in the first place, by a number of particulars with which I was acquainted, and which injured its value, when I ought to have assumed the standard as correct, and thereby been enabled to degrade my opposing facts to the rank of trifling exceptions. I was so much occupied, it seems, in the examination of the particulars of the argument, that I became insensible to the value of its cumulative character.
But my object was to prove that the particulars in this cumulative argument were of no value, because different species were assumed as identical in distribution, when we only knew that they resembled each other generally in structure. Now, it is this general resemblance in structure which has induced Mr Conybeare to conclude that all the analogies invariably lean one way,—all point to the "products of warmer climates as the only beings with which the tenants of our strata hold affinity.'" Mr Conybeare (as well as many other geologists of reputation who have not attended to the first principles of zoology) does not seem to be aware of the origin of this affinity, the character of which, on this account, it seems necessary to state in this place, however briefly. There are more species of animals in tropical than in arctic countries, and better collections of specimens of these in our public establishments. Whenever, therefore, we attempt to trace the resemblance of a new, recent, or extinct animal to those which have been identified, we may expect to find analogous forms most readily where the species and the specimens are most numerous. All this leaning one way may point out generical affinity, but, in reference to the point at issue, the physical distribution of species, it offers no assistance whatever. My views "of the doctrine of chances," therefore, do not probably differ much from those of my opponent, who does not seem to be aware that he throws with loaded dice, and that the " cumulative" evidence which is cast up, though highly useful to the systematical zoologist, has hitherto betrayed the unsuspecting geologist into error.
I am at a loss to comprehend in what way Mr Conybeare has any right to censure me, on account of the difference of my "geological notions, from the speculations of Professor Buckland." I am not aware of any remarkable difference in geological opinion betwixt us, with the exception of the " diluvian hypothesis." The views of Cuvier, on this subject, I have always considered as erroneous, and I did regret that so acute and energetic a geologist as Professor Buckland should have been deceived by them. The learned Professor's zeal for a favourite vision, led him to provoke me to a reply in the 28th Number of the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, April 1826,— a reply which my friends assure me gave the death-blow to the diluvian hypothesis. Certain at least it is, that, since that time, with the exception of a very few individuals who may still be found on stilts, amidst the " retiring waters," the opponents of the hypothesis have become as numerous as were formerly its supporters, and the period is probably not far distant, when the "Reliquiae diluvianae" of the Oxonian geologist will be quoted as an example of the idola specus.
When we examine any genus of animals or plants, we find the species differing more or less in habit. Whatever species we assume as the type, the others will be found varying more or less in form, and in their relation to heat and moisture. If we consider the typical species as limited to a certain isothermal line, others will be found departing therefrom; and in many groups will be found species linked together by external resemblance, yet widely separated by geographical distribution. In every genus, whether limited or extensive, there is a leaning this way, (even in the Palms, to which Mr Conybeare rather incautiously alludes), though this cumulative evidence has been strangely overlooked. These plain truths, familiar to every one in the least degree acquainted with the laws which regulate the distribution of animals, constitute the foundation of my argument, though it has been unaccountably perverted by my opponent. He exhibits me as stating that, "because some genera are not limited, therefore no genera are so limited," or " because, in certain widely diffused genera you cannot argue from the habits of some of the congenerous species, to the rest, therefore you cannot argue thus in any genera whatsoever." Now, such views of the subject never entered into my mind; and most certainly I was never guilty of sending such nonsense to the press. The reader will search in vain for it in my paper of April last. It has been said, that, "when a man has the framing both of his own argument and that of his antagonist, he must be a very unskilful logician if he do not come off with advantage." But though the " narrow system of Oxford logic," in which my opponent states that he has " unfortunately been trained," may have dictated to him such a mode of proceeding, common candour should have exercised a counteracting influence; and common prudence should have restrained him from putting on record such a proof of his limited acquaintance with the influence of climate as the following, in which, by a singular mistake, he attributes the habits of the individuals of a species, to the species of a genus: "Nature has limited by the laws of climate, not only species but genera;" "so that although some stray species may be found beyond the general limits, yet these are very rare, and always attest, by their dwarf size, how uncongenial is their habitation."
Before proceeding to the consideration of what Mr Conybeare supposes to be the proofs of the accuracy of his views, I may notice the censure he passes on my " philosophical boldness," because I ventured to state that Cuvier had boasted too confidently of analogy as a guide; and, because I quoted the resemblance of the sheep and the sow, in the general form of their feet, while a great difference existed in the digestive organs.
Mr Conybeare should have compared the feet of the two species before he ventured to write on the subject. I might have quoted several other examples, from the same source, but I shall at present only supply one other. Cuvier has declared that " the smallest articulating surface of bone, or the smallest apophysis, has a determinate character, relative to the class, the order, the genus, and the species to which it belonged; insomuch, that when one possesses merely a well preserved extremity of a bone, he can, by careful examination, and the aid of a tolerable analogical knowledge, and of accurate comparison, determine all these things with as much certainty as if he had the entire animal before him." Yet in spite of this piece of silly gasconading, the learned anatomist is forced to admit, in reference to the fossil bones of the genus Horse, " It is not possible to say whether it was one of the species now existing or not, because the skeletons of these species are so like each other, that they cannot be distinguished by the mere comparison of isolated fragments." Analogy is thus at fault; for surely remarkable differences prevail in the external appearance, habits, and distribution of the Zebra, the Ass, and the Horse.
We admire the boldness with which Mr Conybeare ventures to proceed from generals to particulars; and he commences by displaying the extent of his knowledge regarding the distribution of the Lamelliferous Polyparia, constituting the genus Madrepora of Linnaeus. After all his researches, he has discovered that a single species lives in the seas of Norway, and he triumphantly exhibits this " solitary tenant of colder seas," in contrast with the " hundreds of species inhabiting warm latitudes." (There is a considerable numerical exaggeration here, which I leave to its author to correct.) In a note to this paragraph, he adds, that an English Caryophyllea had been described by Mr Broderip, in the Zoological Journal for April 1828. Mr Broderip, it is true, imagined that " the hard parts of this indigenous species do not appear to have been any where described but had Mr Conybeare been acquainted with the history of British zoophytes, he might have corrected this mistake, by pointing out that I myself had published (in the 2d volume of the Wernerian Society's Memoirs) a description of the same species, fourteen years previous to April 1828; and I may add, that Dr Leach saw my specimens so early as 1812. Personally unacquainted, apparently, with the physical distribution of the Lamelliferous Polyparia, Mr Conybeare endeavoured to gain the requisite information, by a process which indicated his incompetency for the task. In order to ascertain the number of species, he consulted Lamarck's Catalogue, (Histoire Naturelle des Animauxsans Vertebres, we presume), which is not offered as complete, nay, where the author expressly says. In ordinary circumstances, any zoologist wishing to ascertain the productions of the northern regions, would have consulted those authors in whose writings the species have been described, instead of a confessedly imperfect compiler. Mr Conybeare must surely have heard of the " Systema Naturae" of Linnaeus, where the MaDrepora ramea is recorded as a native of Norway, as well as prolifera. If he could not have obtained a sight of the " Systema," he might have consulted the " Elenchus Zoophytorum" of Pallas, and he would have found similar notices. But he should not have contented himself with even such compilations. "Lubuit enim integros adire fontes, atque haurire." In the "Prodromus Zoologiae Danicae" of Muller, he would have found notices of the following as northern species, M. interstincta,damicornis, muricata, prolifera, virginea, ramea. In the Fauna Grcenlandica of Fabricius, M. damicornis and parasitica are recorded. Had he even imposed on himself the less irksome task of ascertaining the number of British Species, and ever opened my " British Animals," he would have found three species indicated as natives of our own seas, (p. 598). He would thus have discovered nine species inhabiting the colder seas, instead of his " solitary tenant," and saved himself the pain of owning his connexion with the following flippant remarks: "How will Dr Fleming account for the gradual disappearance of this family in our latitudes? Why does a page of our natural history, once so rich, now present a total blank?"
I have thus redeemed a pledge given at the beginning of this paper, that Mr Conybeare lauded me as a compiler, when he had not at all examined my alleged compilations; and I may now add, that he appears to have been unacquainted with the animals about which he was speculating, and even with the authors by whom they have been described.
Mr Conybeare next passes on to the Crinoidea. There is a large species, a native of the West Indian seas, and a species inhabiting our own seas, so minute (surely he has never seen Thompson's figure or description !) " that it cannot be ascertained to belong to the family at all, without a powerful lens.'1' All the fossil species are large, and hence the analogy he supposes is in his favour. But Mr Conybeare should have been aware, since the discovery of the Encrinus Milleri of that indefatigable zoologist the Rev. Lansdown Guilding, that there is a small species as well as a large one in the Caribbean seas, and that in consequence of the facts ascertained by Thompson and Guilding, the Pentacrinus and Comatula must be united in one group, a circumstance which the frontispiece of Miller's Crinoidea might have intimated; and he may, at the same time, be informed, that a large and well developed species of the latter is now before me from North Lat. 73°.
My opponent very prudently passes over the bivalve and unchambered univalve shells, and makes a stand under the protection of the Nautilidce. "The few existing species of this class (he says) are confined to warm latitudes." Where did he learn this dogma, uttered with so much complacency? In Turton's Conchological Dictionary there are 24 species, and in my" British Animals" 39 species of the class, enumerated as natives of our own seas!" 
Having hitherto conducted the chase in a more rapid manner than was probably suitable to the resources of the pursued, we shall slacken our pace for a few moments while we discuss the merits of his arguments derived from Reptiles. Of the Crocodiles, he says, " This family actually includes many species, and is exclusively limited to warm latitudes." Some of the species are certainly natives of warm latitudes, but there is here a leaning observable in some species towards colder regions. The crocodile of the Nile can surely bear a greater degree of cold than the one which inhabits Senegal, though probably less than the caiman of the Mississippi. If, then, we have an existing species capable of living in a temperate river, where is the foundation of the claim of the extinct species to be regarded as exclusively the inhabitants of warm latitudes? The geographical positions of their remains may be considered as an index of the physical distribution of the species.
"The existing Chelonians" says Mr Conybeare, "with a few minute exceptions, are all confined to warm latitudes." He ought to have enumerated these minute exceptions, stated the number of species natives of Europe, and the different stragglers which have visited the British shores, aye, the Ultima Thule; and we have no doubt that his pen would never have recorded the passage now quoted.
Mr Conybeare gives " a list of the animal genera actually limited exclusively to warm latitudes, but occurring fossil in this country.'' He admits that certain genera afford no indications as to temperature whatever, and affects to overlook the value of the evidence which they furnish in determining the laws of physical distribution. But to what extent will his selected animal genera aid him? His first example is the Elephant. This genus is at present confined to warm latitudes; therefore he supposes every fossil species must have flourished in a warm latitude. It is not my intention to repeat the arguments already advanced, to prove the falsity of this conclusion, for the scantiness of Mr Conybeare's zoological attainments prevents him from comprehending their value. But I will introduce him to Baron Cuvier (whom he has designated " the first philosophical authority," but whose writings he does not appear to have examined), who will tell him, in the first volume of his incomparable work " Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles," that the extinct elephant or mammoth was not a dwarf; that it had a covering suited to a cold climate, (p. 197); that it possibly could support a temperature too low for the existence of Indian species; that it is even probable that it was so constituted as to prefer a cold climate, (p. 200); nay, so satisfied is Baron Cuvier of the visionary nature of the views entertained by the school to which Mr Conybeare belongs, that he says.
Mr Conybeare closes his paper with the following passage: "I will also add, that the bones of Cetacea, which might at first sight seem to indicate a cold ocean, either belong to species resembling those of the Mediterranean (the Rorqual), or to extinct genera (the Ziphius), or are considered by Cuvier as doubtful." So far, however, is this state of the case from being a correct one, that Baron Cuvier has enumerated ten fossil species: one is like a species native of the Ganges, a second has no close affinity with any known species, while the remaining eight bear a resemblance to the species at present natives of the British seas! Some of the species referred to by Cuvier as analogous, the Narwal, for example, are not likely, in our day at least, to dwell in the Mediterranean, even under the protection of my opponent.
I have thus replied to Mr Conybeare's paper, when probably I might have been employing myself otherwise to greater advantage. But the interests of truth seemed to require of me to point out the vast difference between confident assertion and the deductions of science; and to attempt to convince my opponent that the physical distribution of animals is "a subject (to reply in his own terms) in which his own information is evidently extremely limited; and yet one without an intimate acquaintance with which, it is impossible to conduct to a satisfactory conclusion the discussions upon which he has chosen to enter."

