ART. XVI.-Remarks on the Modern Strata. By the Rev. JOHN FLEMING, D. D. F. R. S. E. and M. W. S., Minister of Flisk.
THE history of the Earth, as determined by the documents of geognosy, gives indications of different epochs, each of which may be characterised by the peculiarities of the strata which were then deposited, and the organised beings with which the Earth was then peopled. The remains of the ancient animals and vegetables which are now found in these strata, have, in many cases, been preserved sufficiently entire to furnish the characters of the species, and enable an attentive observer to recognise the different individuals belonging to them, even when occupying different beds, and associated with other relics. In tracing, therefore, the history of any one species, we find the remains of the individuals belonging to it, dispersed through a limited series of strata, neither occurring in those of a more ancient, nor in those of a more modern date. The associates of this species, or the other species, the remains of which occur in the limited series of strata, are in like manner circumscribed in their geognostical distribution. If we now attend to the position occupied by the strata of this series, in reference to those of other or newer series,-—their mechanical structure and chemical constitution; and, if we determine the species of organised beings, the relics of which are imbedded in the strata of this series, we may consider the history of the series or group as complete. The characters of several of such series have, to a considerable extent, been determined, thereby establishing so many important epochs in the Earth’s history.
It seems to be determined that the organised species, if connected with one series, differs from the organised species of every other series, and that the inorganic materials of the series have likewise a co-existing peculiar character.
If we contemplate for a moment the genera of organised beings, we shall find that some of the species belong to the older, others to the newer series of strata, while some, still living, belong to the modern epoch of the Earth. It is of great importance to attend to this distinction. Many geologists of eminence reason respecting genera instead of species, and, consequently, fall short of that precision which seems so desirable in geological science. Some examples on this subject are given in the paper on the “ Testaceous Annelidea”.
In the paper “On the Influence of Society on the Distribution of British Animals,” which appeared in the last number of this Journal, I entered upon several zoological details, serving to illustrate the characters of the species belonging to the modern series of strata, and to demonstrate the imperfection of that classification whereby these strata are divided into dilluvian and postdilluvian groups. In the present paper, it is my-intention to offer another arrangement, founded, not on considerations connected with the relics imbedded in these strata, but on the materials of which they consist, and the circumstances which have operated in producing them.
The surface of the Earth is, at present, in an unnatural condition. Mountains rise above the level of the sea, and hollows exist beneath its level. What those causes have been, so much in opposition to the known laws of gravitation, which have produced this unnatural state, we stop not here to inquire. But we shall be compelled, in prosecuting the object at present in, view, to contemplate those causes which are operating in bringing the Earth into a natural state, by wearing down the projecting parts, filling up the hollows, placing the surface every where at right angles to the direction of gravity, and perfecting the form of the Earth as a spheroid of equilibrium. It is difficult to arrange the strata belonging to the modern epoch of the earth’s history, into subordinate groups, because the different causes
operating in their production, act so frequently in concert, that it is not easy to assign to each its due share. All of them are subject to considerable irregularities, occasionally suspending their influence, or renewing their operations with redoubled violence. But the situations of these different strata, and the classes or orders into which they may be distributed, will be better understood by the following remarks.
I. Soil.—The varying conditions of the atmosphere, in reference to temperature and humidity, exercise a powerful influence on the inorganic substances exposed to their disintegrating and decomposing effects. A film of earth is produced fit for the support and the nourishment of vegetables, which speedily clothe the surface. The history of the soil (in reference to its composition and structure), now under the influence of vegetation, must be studied in connection with the physical and geographical distribution of plants. The increase of the quantity of carbonaceous matter, marks the number of plants which have flourished and perished. Extensive forests are established in certain districts, and for ages, by the annual falling of their leaves, increase the thickness of the stratum by which they are supported. But this addition to its thickness seems, in some cases, to impair its fertility. The trees decay, mosses and lichens multiply, and the soil, instead of supporting any longer a forest, receives an addition of a layer of peat. But, in some districts the peat has been formed, in the absence of a previously existing forest, by the growth of the mosses and lichens alone. In Zetland, I have observed peat ten feet in thickness, consisting of the relics of that common moss Trichostomum Ianug'imsum, which continues to flourish vigorously on the decaying remains of its progenitors, or of itself. There is one difference, however, prevailing between the forest-peat and the moss-peat, deserving of notice. The soil under the former is always of some thickness,-—while under the latter it, in many cases, can scarcely be said to exist. Partial depositions of bog-iron ore and marl occur in this formation. The marl usually consists of fluviatile shells, or encrusted masses, and its origin may be traced to springs holding carbonate of lime in solution.
2. Sanddnfi.—The products of the disintegration of inorganic matter, from whatever cause,-the action of the atmosphere, or the attrition of rivers or the sea,—are not all equally favourable for the growth of plants. When the rocks, which have been disintegrated, consist nearly of pure quartz, and the result is a siliceous sand, the soil is not only unfit for the growth of vegetables, but, from its want of cohesion, is not stationary. The wind regulates its condition. The strata of this division, in reference to their origin and position, may be divided into two groups. The first will comprehend the inland sand-drafts, forming deserts, striking examples of which occur in Africa and Asia. To the second, will belong the shore sanddrg'fis, forming downs, of which our own country presents several well marked illustrations. The materials, in the latter case, chiefly consist of sand, derived from granitic or sandstone rocks, and portions of comminuted shells. Shore sand-drift spreads over the soil, and destroys its vegetable cover. In some places, I have seen it forming a thick bed over forest and moss peat; the latter exhibiting unequivocal symptoms of rapid decomposition. -'
8. Detritus.-—'-Were the elevated portions of the earth, in a natural state, in reference to gravity, the soil formed by decomposition and disintegration, won (1 remain in its place, and protect the subjacent materials from farther changes. But the portions loosened, of whatever size, have a tendency to descend from their unnatural elevation; and they are aided in their progress by the action of rains, frost and snow. The accumulations which occur, flanking the acclivities of mountain-ranges, are of this description. The extent of their encroachment on the low land, and the peculiarities of their arrangement, have usually been effected by the agency of running water. The rivers, whether raging in fury during rains and thaws, or gently descending, during droughts, are still contributing to transport the disintegrated materials of the mountains towards the plains, cartying forward the larger masses to short distances; but the minuter portions to their lowest level, to form islands and banks at the estuary. The strata of detritus thus formed, are necessarily irregular in their composition and structure, and contain the relics of the animals or vegetables of the river district, or acclivity, in which they are situated. Detritus is subject to be c0vered with soil and sand-drifts; and, in many cases, repetitions of these strata have taken place.
&. Silt—Wherever there are hollows filled with still-water, whether these support the character of inland-lakes, or of the sea, processes are going forward, which have a tendency to fill them up; and the matter deposited we here venture to'terrn Silt. 
The Lacustrine Silt is, in some instances, saline, arising from the evaporation which the waters experience during the summer season. Of these, however, we have no examples in this country. The more common lacustrine silt, consists of the fine particles of detritus, carried into the lake by rivers or temporary streams, and slowly deposited from its state of suspension. It. is increased by the supply produced on the margin of the lake by the disintegration, decomposition, and attrition of the rocks which prevail. As the lake becomes shallower, plants and animals multiply, and contribute by their relics, to accelerate the process. In ordinary cases, this silt consists of an inferior bed of sand, with an incumbent bed of peat. In some cases there is an intervening bed of marl. The marl consists of the relics of those testaceous mollusca, which feed upon the plants of the lake, and the animalcula of its waters, including phytivorous and carnivorous, pulmoniferous and branchiferous species. The marl-bed likewise receives as the effect of subsidence, the skeletons of the animals which have been drowned, while feeding on the marshy borders of the lake, or have been conveyed into it by floods. The character of the lowest or earthy bed, depends on the character of the bed of the lake, and the materials of the surrounding hills. Sometimes it is a sandy-clay, or a clayey-sand; while, in other instances, it is a pure clay, consisting chiefly of aluminous earth, or a pure siliceous mud, usually termed Kaolin. When a lake of this kind, situate on a level with the sea, and near the coast, has been filled up, chiefly with earthy matter, the surface of which has passed into soil, fit for the support of trees, the seaward barrier may be broken down, drainage by the tide may take place, followed by subsidence; and that soil may be daily covered at flood, which formerly was out of its reach, and above its level. In a paper published some time ago in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. ix. p. 4-19, I endeavoured to explain the formation of submarine forests, agreeably to the preceding views. Subsequently, another explanation of these phenomena has been offered by Mr Henslow, Professor of Mineralogy in the University of Cambridge *. He considers the deluge of Noah as having taken place by water “ at that time added to the Earth ;”‘ and that, since that period, “ this extraneous supply of water” has been absorbed, to a certain extent, by the solid portion of the Earth; but a portion still remains, covering with the sea those forests which were, in its antediluvian state, above its level. If these forests grew on rock, the explanation here offered might seem plausible; but they are supported by a stratum of lacustrine silt, and in this respect exhibit a common character. Of the nature of this supporting stratum, the learned Professor had not been aware, else it would have led him to assign to the forests a different origin. '
The Curses, especially those of high level, of the Forth and the Tay, seem to consist of lacustrine silt, and to have been produced in a fresh-water lake, to which the sea, in its ordinary movements, did not extend. The proofs, in support of this opinion, will shortly be laid before the public.
In some cases, the different beds of lacustrine silt seem to have been repeated, and two or more series, each consisting of sand (or clay) marl, and peat, Occur in the bed of the former lake. In such cases, the first or lowest layer of peat, may have been covered by detritus of sand during a flood, placing the lake in some measure in its original condition ; or the peat itself may be regarded as detritus, brought from a higher level in the form of mud.
Marine Silt derives its origin from the detritus of rivers, and the washing operations taking ‘place on the sea-shore. At the mouths of rivers, the matter deposited has many of the characters of detritus, united with those of marine silt. Farther of the shore, the marine silt is deposited under the influence of currents, forming shoals or. banks, as the Dogger-bank, the Longfortus and J utland-reef in the German ocean. The marine-silt receives the remains of sea animals, which, in some instances, contribute greatly to its increase, as the coral reef abundantly testify. It must likewise, in the case of great floods, receive the relics of terrestrial animals. Mr Stevenson has published the results of some very curious and valuable observations on the marine silt of the German Ocean, in the Wernerian Memoirs, vol. iii. p. 314. >
5. Diluvium.—Violent movements in the waters of the globe, both of lakes and of the sea, appear to have taken place at different intervals, and have introduced depositions among the m0dern strata of the most interesting kind. These deposits, from violent inundation, divide themselves into two kinds.
Lacustn'ne Diluvium.—Tbis seems to have been produced by the sudden bursting of the barriers of alpine lakes, by which/ the waters flowing out in mass have carried before them. all the detached fragments of rock, soil of every kind, detritus, and silt, and distributed them at the lowest level on the plain. Switzerland has frequently experienced the effects of such sudden inundations; and the horizontal shelves of the glens of Lochaber, in our own country, give unequivocal indications of similar occurrences.
The diluvium, in some cases, consists of clay, deposited in one, unstratified mass, and the contained boulder-stones are as large at the top as at the bottom of the bed; circumstances indicating the violent action of the transporting cause. This diluvium is known in Scotland byvthe name _ol' Till. The sand and gravel usually form small eminences, obviously influenced in their direction by the neighbouring bills or valleys, and occasionally containing deep cavities, the indications of the eddies in the torrent by which they were deposited.
In some instances the diluvium consists chiefly of peat, as happened in the irruption of Solway moss, 16th December 1772, an interesting account of which was published by Dr Walker in the Phil. Trans. vol. lxii. p. 1923.
These materials seem to have been derived from the strata of the river district. Hence, even in a comparatively limited space, the materials of the diluvium may exhibit very different characters. In the neighbourhood of my dwelling, where very extensive depositions of diluvium occur, the materials consist exclusively of the remains of primary, transition, and old red sandstone rocks. Ten miles to the south, they as unequivocally include the relics of the independent coal formation.
In speculating on these changes which have taken place, we should bear in mind, that the aspect of the country is now widely different from that which it must anciently have presented. ‘ There are several facts which lead me to believe, that the German Ocean was once an inland lake, on the east side of our central chain of primitive rocks ; and that the Minch was another, on the west side, having, as its barrier against the Atlantic, another primitive chain, the wreck of which new forms the Long Island.
The organic remains found in this lacustrine diluvium, include of course those of the animals and plants which occupied the districts through which the currents passed. In some cases they seem to be collected together in one spot; in other cases they have been found detached.
As in some measure connected with lacustrine diluvium, that which is produced by waterspouts deserves to be noticed. Many striking examples of this sort are on record. The effects are similar to the bursting of ; a lake, and the matter deposited exhibits nearly the same character.
Marine Diluvium.—The evidence proving the origin of this kind of diluvium, rests on the occurrence of the remains of marine animals, in such circumstances as to indicate that the sea had transported them to their present situations. Many sudden risings of the sea have taken place within the period of authentic history, by which shells, and sand, and gravel, have been placed in situations now considerably removed from the influence of the tide. Other inundations, of which neither history nor tradition preserve any memorial, have left their spoils in some cases far inland, and at higher levels.‘
In 1806, I examined a bed of seashells which occurs to the westward of Borrowstounness, on the Forth. At Craigenbuck, about two miles west from the town, I found it upwards of three feet in thickness, resting on a bed of small gravel, and elevated thirty-three fiat above high-water mark. The shells belong to animals still existing in the Frith of Forth. The common oyster and mussel occur in greatest abundance; besides which were observed, Patella vulgaris, Venus pullastra, Buccinum unda_ tum and lapz'llus, Turbo littm'cus, and Nerita littoralia. This bed may be traced, nearly at the same elevation, several miles to the westward, on the south bank of the Forth ; and at Alloa the same bed occurs, but the shells are in a more broken state, and occur at a much lower level .  Two interesting facts have recently been made public, in all probability connected with the inundation of the sea, which deposited the shells now referred to- In July 1819, the skeleton of a. whale was found imbedded in Laeustrine silt, at the marsh between the estate of Airthrey, belonging to Sir Robert Abercromby, Baronet, and the estate of Powis, the prdperty of Edi ward Alexander, Esq., near Stirling. The skeleton was about 72 feet long, giving indication of its being a Razor-back, and was situate 20 feet above the rise of the highest tides in the Forth *. Another skeleton of a whale has been discovered, in similar circumstances, on the opposite side of the Forth, near Dunmore Park, the seat of the Right Honourable Lord Dunmore. It probably belonged likewise to a Razor-back, as it is stated to have measured from 85 to 90 feet in length. It was situate in the same lacustrine silt, and “ between 23 and 24fiet higher than the highest tide of the Forth at present 1'.” In the same bed of lacustrine silt, stags’ horns are occasionally found. Disposed as we are to connect the bed of marine shells with the skeletons of the whales, and to consider that one inundation placed these remains of different marine animals in such peculiar situations; other relics of the inhabitants of the deep may yet be looked for on both banks of the Forth and its lateral valleys. Indications of violent commotions in the German Ocean, occasioning inundations in the connected friths, likewise occur to the northward. In the Statistical Account of the Parish of Peterhead, by the Rev. Dr Moir (vol. xvi. p. 558.), it is stated, that “ fossil shells are found in great quantities, 20 or 30 feet above the present level of the sea; and it is remarkable, that some of them are of a larger size than any that are now to be found on the coast.” In the account cf the Parish of Nig, Rossshire, (vol. xiii. p. 21.), it is said, that “ in the place of Ankerville, a part of the property of Mr Cockburn Ross of Shandwicke, in a bank removed at more than the distance of a mile from the sea, and raised many feet above its level, there is a stratum of oyster-shells of considerable extent, and above half a foot in depth; they lie about three feet below the surface of the ground, and, underneath them, there is a stratum of fine sand, like that on the sea-shore.” In the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (vol. x. p. 105.), there is a “ Notice respecting the Vertebra of a Whale found in a bed of bluish clay near Dingwall,” by Sir G. S. Mackenzie, Baronet. The bone was found in a bed of marine diluvium, consisting of a dark bluish clay, much mixed with sewshells, three miles distant from high-water-mark, and 12' feet in height above the level of the sea. The occurrence of this bone and accompanying shells, when viewed in connection with the oyster-shells at, Ankerville, in a different part of the Bay of Cromarty, give indications of an inundation of the sea in that quarter, similar to that which appears to have taken place in the Frith of Forth, and with which it was probably cotemporary.
On the west side of the country depositions of marine diluvium have likewise been noticed, corresponding in character with those on the eastern coast.
On cutting through a bed of sand and clay, which is about 4'0jizet above the level of the present bed of the Clyde, nearly four miles from Glasgow, and in the line of the Afdrossan Canal, a considerable accumulation of marine shells was met with. These consist of the common species at present inhabiting the Frith of Clyde, but at a distance of twenty miles from the spot where these relics are situate. The notice of this occurrence, by Captain Laskey, is inserted in the Annals of Philosophy for February 1814, vol. iii. p. 150., and Wernerian Memoirs, vol. iv. p. 568.
The marine deposits which occur on the banks of Loch Lomond, have been minutely described by Mr James Adamson, in Wernerian Memoirs, vol. iv. p. 334. These occur in three different places on the margin of the loch. In one place, the seashells are united with compact calctutf,—in the other they are imbedded in a brown clay. The species are similar to those noticed by Captain Laskey, and still common in the estuary of the Frith of Clyde. They are considered as occurring about 22fiet above the present level of the sea.
To these examples of marine diluvium others might be added, which have been observed in England, as in Essex, 8w.— Geol. Trans. i. p. 330. And it is probable, that many more remain to be investigated. The shells which occur, being those of the present seas around the British Isles, furnish the means of distinguishing the modern marine diluvium from depositions of a similar character, which have taken place during earlier epochs, and in which the materials are yet in an unconsolidated state; as in the different formations above the chalk. The marine shells, however, in these last, do not belong to the present race of animals.
6. Volcanic Deposita—These, whether of lava, ashes, or encrustations round the margin of hot-springs, may cover all the strata already enumerated, or be covered by them. Fortunately for this country, such deposits, with a single exception, are absent. On the 20th October 1755, a shower of black dust Fell in Zetland. It resembled lamp-black, but smelled strongly of sulphur.—Phil. Trans. iv. p. 9297. A similar dust fell on a ship belonging to Leith, 0n the 23d or 24th of October, when between Zetland and Iceland, and about 25 leagues distant from the former.--Phil. Trans. xlix. p. 510.
In viewing these different groups of modern strata, it is surprising to observe the various causes which may have been concerned in their production, and the intermixture of the individuals of the animal and vegetable kingdom, of fresh-water and terrestrial production, with those of the ocean. A most interesting question here presents itself, and one which involves some of the most important speculations in geology. Are we to consider the causes by which the different modern strata have been produced, as analogous to those which have contributed to the formation of the strata, belonging to the more ancient epochs of the Earth’s history? If this question be answered in the affirmative, the occurrence of fresh and salt water deposits in the same hollow, and the remains of land and sea animals in the same bed, will cease to excite our surprise; and many of the irregularities, in thickness and extent, and arrangement, which the strata exhibit, will more easily be referred to their true cause. In such circumstances, the geologist will discover the importance of attending to the geognostical relations of the modern strata, and the laws which influence the physical and geographical distribution of the present races of organised beings; in order that, by proceeding from the distinct t0 the obscure, he may qualify himself for illustrating, with a greater chance of success, the various changes which the crust of this globe has undergone.
In examining the peculiar characters of the causes which operate in the production of the modern strata, we discover, in their results, three groups possessing very different features. In one we witness matter brought from an unnatural state, or from a high level above the sea, and deposited in a more natural condition, or nearer the level of the sea. Such are the depositions of detritus, lacustrine and marine silt, and lacustrine diluvium. In another, the causes in operation prevent, in some measure, the tendency of the wearing and lowering of the elevated parts of the Earth, and the products are soil and inland sand-drifts. In a third group, the matter deposited is brought from a natural condition, near the level of the sea, and elevated into an unnatural situation. Such are the products of shore-sand-drifts,—-of marine inundations, and of volcanic eruptions. How far these may have mutually counterbalanced one another, in the great scale, and during the different epochs of the Earth, can scarcely be satisfactorily determined, in the present state of geological science.
The preceding remarks, on the modern strata, when viewed in connection with the observations on the extinct and extirpated animals, published in the last number of the Journal, will, I hope, serve to throw some light on the modern epoch of the Earth’s history, and the important geological phenomena which it embraces.

