IN the beginning of the month of August last, I spent a few days at Aberbrothick in Angusshire, for the purpose of examining the marine vermes of that part of the eastern coast of Scotland. In my walks along the shore, I observed some appearances in the stratification of the rocks, which attracted my notice, and from the notes taken of these at the time, I have drawn up the following observations, which I submit to the consideration of the Society.
  Between the Bay of Aberbrothick on the southwest, and Lunan Bay on the north-east, the coast is extremely bold and rocky ; and for the space of six miles, presents to the German Ocean, precipitous, broken, and indented cliffs. The highest point, where there is a precipice rising from the sea to the height of 254 feet, is at the flagstaff to the eastward of the House of Ethie, the seat of the Right Honourable the Earl of Northesk. All the rocks of this promontory, are of a reddish colour, and from that circumstance, it has been denominated by mariners the Redhead; the inhabitants of the district, however, restrict the name to the high focks which appear to the south of the ruins of St Murdoch’s Chapel.
  From this promontory, inland, the surface falls with a gentle slope, and at last forms the plain through which two small rivers, the Brothick and the Lunan flow. The Brothick Burn, towards its mouth, runs in a southerly direction, and falls into the sea at the Town of Aberbrothick, commonly called Arbroath. It winds its course through a narrow valley, which is from one to two hundred yards in breadth. The sides of the valley, which consist of strata of sand, of coarse sand and gravel, though much waved, are in general parallel to each other, the salient angles of the one corresponding with the receding angles of the other ; the bottom consists of fine earthy sand and gravel. In the centre of this valley, there is a conical hill, on the summit of which the ancient Church of St Vigeans is situated. This hill is composed of soft sandstone, which is covered to the top with a thick coating of gravelly mould.

  The Brothick Burn appears to have formed its own channel in the soft alluvial strata through Which it flows. The bottom of the valley is of considerable extent, when compared with the narrow bed which contains the river in the drought of summer ; but when the stream is swollen with autumnal floods, or choked with the ice and snow of winter, the valley itself, unless prevented by artificial barriers, would then become the bed of the river, as its smooth surface indicates it at one time to have been. When the present bed of the river shall have acquired sufficient depth to contain all the water which at any season flows in it, then a new flat will be formed on each side, and the banks will present that terraced appearance which may be observed on the sides of many streams which have scooped out their channels in loose and soft materials. The opposite banks of rivers, may always be expected to be parallel where the materials of which they are formed are similar in composition : having obtained such a relation at first, they have been exposed to the influence of the same destructive agents in every subsequent period.
  The beds of gravel and sand, which form the banks of the Brothick, are Connected with similar depositions, which occur in the neighbourhood. Near the Town of Aberbrothick, there are numerous hills of gravel, which appear to have a north-westerly direction. The gravel is frequently coarse, and consists of rounded masses of granite,gneiss, mica-slate, quartz, porphyry, greenstone, basalt, and red-sandstone, with interposed layers of fine sand. It sometimes alternates with beds of sand composed of small particles of quartz and felspar, and numerous scales of silvery mica. The gravel is in many places so firmly cemented, that the hand is unable to separate the individual masses, and the particles of sand often cohere, and form a sandstone which can be divided into strata by means of a knife. Sometimes beds of clay occur, which have a laminated structure, and indicate a deposition from a fluid but little agitated.	
  The eastern base of these hills, is truncated, and the intervening space between their extremities and the shore is level, and consists of a soil composed of gravel, mixed with the remains of sea-shells. The lower or southern portion of the Town of Aberbrothick, rests upon strata of seaborne gravel, mixed with the fragments of several species of littoral shells. This portion is elevated but a few feet above the ordinary rise of spring-tides, and is liable to inundations of the sea during great storms. It appears, that at a former period, a considerable portion of land had been gained from the sea especially along the coast to the south of the town ; but the currents having changed, Neptune is again resuming his dominion over those tracts which he formerly relinquished,and is at present making very rapid encroachments upon the land.
   The Lunan Burn, which empties itself into the German Ocean at the head of Lunan Bay, runs in a valley in every respect similar to the Brothick. The alluvial hills which occur towards its mouth, have been greatly altered in form by the operations of agriculture, but they evidently present the same abrupt terminations towards the sea, which we have noticed above. They are defended from any farther encroachments of that element, by a number of low ridges of drifted sea- sand, closely held together by the roots of the Ely m arenarius, Arundo arenaria, Carex arenaria, and Triticum junceum.
   The structure of these hills of gravel, deserves very particular consideration. Far from being a mere heap of rubbish, the beds of sand are often continuous and of considerable extent, and the rolled masses of gravel are deposited in beds with considerable regularity. These beds do not always possess a horizontal position, but present in their stratification a few of those appearances which are usually considered as peculiar to the more ancient strata. Thus, on the banks of the Lunan, about a mile east from Kennell, I observed beds of sand and fine gravel, inclining to the horizon, at an angle of 20; and on the extremities of these beds, were deposited strata of gravel, dipping in an opposite direction at an angle of 15°.

Another appearance of the same kind presented itself to the north-east of the church of St Vigeans, in an opening made in a field for the purpose of obtaining gravel for the roads. Immediately under the soil, there is a horizontal bed of gravel, containing thin layers of sand, resting upon the extremities of strata of coarse sand, dipping E. S. E* at an angle of 24°.
   It is assumed as a first principle in the Huttonian Theory, that all the mineral strata at their formation, were deposited on a horizontal plane. Loose materials, it is said, such as sand and gravel subsiding at the bottom of the sea, and having their interstices filled with water, possess a kind of fluidity, and therefore would arrange themselves in horizontal layers. The figure of the lower beds deposited on an uneven surface, would be affected by two causes, the nature of that surface on the one hand, and the tendency to horizontality on the other; but the latter cause would finally prevail. “ Whenever, therefore, we meet with rocks disposed in layers quite parallel to one another, we may rest assured, that the inequalities of the bottom have had no effect, and that no cause has interrupted the statical tendency But the phenomena described above furnish evidence by which this assumption may be successfully resisted. Here are parallel strata of coarse sand,having an inclination of 24°, which have been deposited from a state of suspension in water. Had the water been in a state of rest, these strata must have assumed a horizontal position, but if we suppose the water to have been in a state of motion, we have then the influence of a new agent to consider, which may lead us to the conclusion, that the motion of a fluid depositing suspended earthy matter, modifies the statical tendency of that matter to horizontality. If the cause now mentioned be considered capable of giving an inclined position of 24° to strata formed from coarse materials mechanically suspended in water, at what angle are we to fix the maximum of its effect, at 24° or at 0* and are we to confine its operation to the construction of the recent beds of gravel and sand, or suppose its influence to have been exerted at the formation of the more ancient strata of the globe ?
   We may add, that these beds of gravel occur at the eastern extremity of the great valley of Strathmore, and in all probability were formed at the time when this valley was an inland lake. The masses of gravel are neither smooth on the surface, nor regularly rounded, as we always observe in sea- gravel. It is also worthy of notice, that similar beds of gravel and sand had been formed in the same place, but at a period more remote, which now appear in the form of solid rock.
   At Wormy Hills, near Aberbrothick, there is a mineral well. The water is a strong chalybeate, and deposites around its margin and that of the stream which runs from it, a copious ferruginous precipitate. I was surprised to find in the ochry mud, within a few yards of the spring, two species of fresh-water shell-fish, the Cyclas cornea, and the Lymncea putris.
   Having thus offered a few remarks on the form and structure of the Alluvial strata, I shall now state the observations which I had an opportunity of making on the Floetz rocks of the district. The general line of bearing which these rocks observe, is from east to west, varying in some places a few degrees to the north of east, and the south of west. The dip is towards the south,, at various angles, but seldom below ten or above twenty-five degrees, and the strata preserve nearly the same degree of thickness in the different parts of their course. The rock which we shall first describe, is,
   1.— RED SANDSTONE. The rocks of Sandstone appear on the coast to the south of the harbour of Aberbrothick, and extend in a north-easterly direction to the flag-staff at Ethie, including a space of nearly five miles. On the great scale, they may be considered as forming one great bed, nearly two miles in thickness, divided into regular strata,some of these exceeding four feet, others only a few lines in thickness. These strata are divided by perpendicular rents, (or backs as they are termed by the quarrymen,) which run at right angles to the line of bearing, are parallel to one another, and often cause the rock to exhibit somewhat of a columnar appearance. This structure has enabled the sea to make great encroachments, and has contributed to give to the scenery its characteristic feature of boldness. When the sea undermines the base of these angular masses, they fall with a tremendous crash, and leave the newly exposed surface of the rock a mural precipice. But it often happens, that the upper portions of the columns are too firmly wedged by the surrounding rock to allow them to be displaced, so that the inferior portions only give way, and in this case, a small cave is formed, which is very speedily enlarged by the surf of an exposed and stormy coast.
   In the promontory of the Redhead, there are a number of caves situated in the rocks of sandstone, and some of them are of considerable magnitude. These afford the seal and the otter a safe retreat during the breeding season, enable the superstitious natives to contemplate the ghastly spectres of Pandaemonium, and have been supposed to exhibit to the geologist a proof of the sea having formerly exerted its influence at a higher level than the ordinary rise of its present tides. The floors of many of these caves being elevated above high-water mark, have led some to infer a rising of the land or a depression of the level of the sea, subsequent to the period of their formation,—suppositions equally gratuitous and unnecessary. If a small cavity is once formed in the soft sandstone, (and caves are always situated in the softer parts of the strata), within the reach of the tide, it will speedily be hollowed out into a cave by the action of the surge, and this cavity will increase in length and height more rapidly, than in breadth and depth. The innermost part offering the greatest resistance, will be assailed most violently by the force of the sea ; and the floor will acquire an inclination, rising as the cave increases in length, in consequence of the direction given to the progressive motion of the littoral waves by the sloping position of the shore. During a storm, the external opening will act like a funnel, and conduct each billow, with its ascending motion, to spend its destructive force in the farthest part of the cave, and there scoop out a recess greatly beyond the reach of an ordinary tide. If the outworks of this recess are removed by the action of the sea, a cave will then open to-day, with its floor higher than the present level of the ocean. There are many caves both on the east and west coasts of Scotland, which have formerly been excavated by the action of sea, but whose pavements at present are never washed by the tide. These, in all probability, owe their origin to the cause which I have here pointed out.
  The strata of sandstone in this district, observe the general direction and inebriation of the beds to which they belong, unless in a few instances, where the structure of individual strata presents marks of irregularity of deposition. Thus, to f:he south of the harbour of Aberbrothick, the (thin laminae which form a stratum, are often uninformable among themselves, while the roof and pavement of the bed are parallel to each other. Appearances of this kind are very common in every sandstone-rock, and in every alluvial hill of water-borne sand. In the last of these, such appearances have been occasioned by irregularities of the motion of the fluid which gave the particles their arrangement. May we not infer the agency of a similar cause in the production of similar appearances in strata of sandstone ?
  In one instance, I observed a little irregularity to prevail, not only in the dip, but also in the direction of the strata, but which irregularity, in the great scale, did not affect the general disposition. To the south of the last-mentioned place, strata of soft slaty sandstone stretch E. by N. and W. by S., and dip at angle of 20° S. by E. When proceeding in this direction, they are interrupted by other strata of sandstone, coarser and more compact, which stretch from S. S. W. to N. N. E., and dip at an angle of 50° to the E. S. E. These cross strata, which extend in their line of bearing upwards of a hundred yards, .are, included on all sides by the regular strata, observing the general dip and direction, except on the western side, where the direction changes from W. by S. to W. S. W. The regular strata at the north side of this interruption, are much intersected by veins of limespar. Can we account for this appearance, otherwise than by supposing, that a partial change in the direction of the depositing fluid occasioned this limited irregularity ; a disturbing force acting laterally or from below, must have changed at the same time the position of the accompanying beds. Such irregularities in the stratification, ought to be studied with care, as they yield instruction to the miner, and afford the geologist a touchstone by which to try the truth of his theory.
   To the south of the harbour of Aberbrothich, the strata of sandstone are from one to three feet in thickness, split into thin laminae, and the particles cohere very feebly. When pieces of this rock are first raised from the bed, they can be cut into slices with a knife, or crumbled to powder by the fingers; but after they have been exposed for some time to the action of the atmosphere, they acquire a considerable degree of hardness. When a fresh piece of the rock is put into a glass with water and agitated, the cohesion between the particles is destroyed, and when the fluid is suffered to rest, the ingredients of the stone divide themselves into three portions. At the bottom is found a fine gritty sand, in the middle small scales of mica, and at the top a portion of argillaceous matter, which continues longest suspended in the water. The hardness which the stone acquires by exposure to the atmosphere, is probably owing to the desiccation of this last substance. In these soft strata, water-borne balls of quartz, granite, gneiss, mica-slate, porphyry, and trap, lie scattered without order, and in some places they are accumulated in such quantity, as to constitute the rock to which Colonel IMRIE has attached the very appropriate name of gravelstone. Sometimes these strata include beds of coarse sandstone, composed of angular grains of quartz and felspar with a little mica, which are less liable to detrition from the action of the sea.
    Immediately to the north of the harbour, similar strata prevail, but the quantity of gravel imbedded in the strata is much greater, and the beds of gravelstone more numerous. In some instances, these rounded balls, which are from a line to a foot in diameter, are cemented together by lime-spar, which occurs in great abundance.
   Proceeding about a mile to the north-east of the harbour, the high cliffs of the Redhead com-licence. Here the sandstone is of a more compact texture, and appears better able to resist the attacks of the waves, so that while the strata to the south have been worn down, and the bay of Aberbrothick now occupies their place, those to the north, still form high and lofty precipices, and yield but slowly to the action of the sea. In examining bays and arms of the sea, we invariably find, as in this instance, that they are situated in softer strata than those which occur on the neighbouring projecting shores ; and the rocks which form the base of valleys, are less compact in their texture than those which constitute the surrounding hills,—facts which prove, that many of the inequalities of the earth’s surface owe their existence to the long-continued action of air and water.
   The sandstone on this part of the coast, is of a pale reddish-brown colour, minutely freckled with grey. It frequently presents narrow stripes and circular spots of ash-grey, or primrose-yellow, and sometimes whole beds of a white colour, may be observed. It appears to consist of minute grains of sand, with a few scales of mica, connected by a basis of iron-shot clay-marl. The particles of sand in some cases are so numerous, that the stone has a very coarse texture, and in many instances appears in the form of gravelstone. When this sandstone is first raised in the quarry, it is very soft, and is easily cut with the working-tools; after exposure for a short time to the atmosphere, it becomes a little harder, but is by no means a very durable material for buildings. When exposed in a wall or house, the surface which has been dressed with the chisel, remains entire until the portion immediately beneath becomes disintegrated, when the external film falls off. After the artificial surface has been removed, the particles crumble down in succession as they separate from the mass. Is it the pressure of the chisel in the dressing of the stone, which, bringing the particles at the surface into closer contact, enables them to resist longer the influence of the atmosphere ? Would it not be advisable to beat the surface of the stones with a hammer, before using them in building, in order to communicate the requisite durability ? The Old Abbey of Aberbrothick is constructed of this kind of rock, and the mouldering surfaces of the stones make the venerable ruins appear still more ruinous.
   In several places, the rock is composed of blunt angular pieces of sandstone, imbedded in a basis of a similar composition. This structure does not appear to the eye, unless the stone has been exposed for some time to the influence of the atmosphere, the fresh fracture presenting a homogeneous surface. These pieces, which appear at first sight to be fragments, are merely contemporaneous portions of the rock ; they present no rounded water-worn surface, and atone extremity, at least, pass by an insensible transition into the rock in which they are enveloped. The term sandstone-conglomerate, ought to be restricted to denominate this kind of rock, as it must either mean sandstone in the form of fragments or balls, or sandstone in heaps. When the term includes the gravelstone of Colonel IMRIE, it evidently has obtained too great a latitude of signification In all the preceding strata of sandstone, there occur beds of slate-clay, seldom above a foot in thickness, and of a similar colour to the surrounding rock. The slate-clay is often in the form of angular pieces included in the sandstone, in which it also occurs in indistinct layers. The longitudinal fracture is usually glimmering, the cross fracture dull. It passes, on the one hand, into 
fine-grained sandstone ; and on the other, into a mineral which may be termed compact clay.
   This mineral is of an ash-grey colour, sometimes also reddish-brown ; fracture compact, even, passing into fine earthy; fragments indeterminately angular, rather blunt-edged ; translucent on the edges ; dull; streak light-coloured ; soft, passing into semi-hard ; easily frangible ; adheres a little to the tongue ; rather heavy. When heated, and afterwards exposed to the air, it crumbles down into a very coarse powder. This substance, which is probably a combination of silica and alumina, with a little iron, occurs in globular-shaped masses, from half an inch, to nearly a foot in diameter. These are compressed, with an irregular margin, and in general an uneven surface. They lie on their sides in the beds of sandstone, especially where it passes into slate- clay, and often also where it is soft and micaceous. Although they occur insulated, yet they seem to preserve a regular direction in the beds in which they are included. The central parts of these masses, are traversed by horizontal and vertical rents, which do not make their appearance at the surface. These rents are widest towards the centre, and are in general filled wfith limespar; sometimes completely, at other times, only in part. These balls appear to bear the same relation to sandstone, which the septarium is known to bear to slate-clay in which it is usually imbedded.

   In these globular concretions, which are much harder than the surrounding rock, different species of the shells termed borers, form their retreats I observed the following:—Mytilus rugosus, Mya suborbicularis, Venus performs, and Venus pullastra of the Testacea Britannica of MONTAGU.
   2. —SANDSTONE-CONGLOMERATE. The rock to which this name has been applied, consists of portions of the older rocks of granite, gneiss, mica- slate, quartz, porphyry, and hornblende. These are in the form of rounded balls, or blunt angular fragments, seldom above six inches in diameter. The interstices between the balls, are filled up with smaller fragments of similar materials, and the rock possesses a considerable degree of cohesion. In this rock, there are numerous narrow lines of sandstone, sometimes also thin beds parallel with the surface of the stratum which encloses them. Similar appearances are observable in the hills of gravel.
   This conglomerate, or gravelstone, occurs in two different situations. In the first, it alternates in beds with the sandstone, as we have already mentioned; and in the second, it occupies an unconformable position in regard to the sandstone. At the western extremity of the high cliffs, which terminate about a mile to the eastward of Aberbrothick, the strata of sandstone rise with an inclination of 18°. The extremities of these strata, are covered with a mass of gravelstone, upwards of thirty feet in thickness, and extending in length a considerable way along the coast. The gravelstone is divided into horizontal strata, and contains numerous partial beds of sandstone. In one place, I observed in the gravelstone an angular mass of sandstone, precisely similar to the beds of sandstone below the gravelstone, which mass was surrounded on all sides by calcareous-spar, or limespar, and the spar also filled up a small linear vein which penetrated to its centre. This fact incontestibly proves, that the sandstone below was formed some time before the gravelstone, and had even acquired a sufficient degree of induration to admit of fragments being detached, while the sharp edges of the fragments shew, that it had not travelled far from its original situation. The two rocks of gravelstone and sandstone, are separated by a well defined line, which also proves the posterior formation of the incumbent mass.
   In one place, there is a small perpendicular rent in the inferior sandstone, wide towards the top, but becoming narrow, and at last terminating about four feet from the separating line, which divides the twro rocks. Into the mouth of this rent, the smaller balls of the gravelstone have descended, and filled up the superior portion of the cavity, and the finer particles of sand have filled up the inferior narrow portion. And it is remarkable, that the slaty fracture of the sandstone at the bottom of the vein, is parallel with the sides of the fissure. The sandstone in the vein, is much impregnated with calcareous matter, and even contains interspersed crystals of calcareous-spar. This is a very fine illustration of the theory of veins.
   This conglomerate, in another place, appears in an unconformable position with regard to the sandstone. A little to the south of the small fishing village of Auchmithie, the common sandstone is suddenly intercepted by a vertical vein of Heavy-spar, nearly two feet in breadth and on the other side of this vein, the gravelstone appears containing many small beds of sandstone. This conglomerate, which comes thus suddenly in contact with the sandstone, is seen to be in unconformable position, as at a little distance it rests its horizontal strata upon the extremities of the more inclined strata of sandstone. Similar appearances in the stratification, are observable in the beds of porphyry and sandstone to the west of Dundee.
   These two rocks which have now been described, must be referred to the class of mechanical deposits, as the eye is unable to discriminate between the sand and gravel, and the rocks of sandstone and gravelstone, the form and structure of the beds being the same. Viewing them, therefore, in this light, whence have the materials, and whence the cementing matter been derived ? The origin of the former, is easily ascertained, as they consist of water-worn fragments of the ancient strata. The cementing matter of the conglomerate is in some cases calcareous-spar, but in general the larger balls rest in a basis, consisting of minute grains of quartz and felspar, without any cement visible to the naked eye. The cohesion in this case, may be owing to disseminated, clayey, or ferruginous matter, with which the water may have been charged during the period of deposition, assisted by the great pressure to which the materials must have been subjected, both from the superincumbent mass of water, and the weight of the materials of the superior strata. That the waters, during the deposition of this portion of the floetz class, were charged with ferruginous matter, is evident from the colour which characterises the formation, in whatever quarter of the globe it has been discovered, and which is not generally observed in the sandstone of any subsequent period. The quantity of clayey marl, which forms the basis of many of the strata of sandstone, may be regarded as in its original state, and may be viewed as bearing the same relation to the grains of sand and gravel, as compact limestone does to the animal relics which it encloses. The sand and organic remains, must be considered as mechanical deposits, the former unaltered, the latter changed by the mysterious process of lapidification.

   These appearances of the sandstone-conglomerate and gravelstone, seem to indicate the operation of a disturbing force, acting on the water, from which these beds were deposited, but of its nature or direction, we will probably forever remain ignorant.
   I have before mentioned, that the rocks of sandstone extend from Aberbrothick to the flag-staff at Ethie; but to the north-east of the flag-staff, and near to the ruins of St Murdoch’s Chapel, these rocks terminate, and are succeeded by beds of trap-, which form the cliffs on the shore to Lunan Bay, and towards Montrose. These rocks of trap, which are termed by the inhabitants scurdie, possess none of those perpendicular fissures which characterise the cliffs of sandstone, and hence towards the sea, they present a surface more irregular and broken. The beds are of considerable thickness, sometimes upwards of ten feet, and at other places only a few inches. Although somewhat irregular, yet the stratification can be distinctly traced, and it corresponds exactly with the sandstone, both in direction and dip. This is very distinctly displayed on the shore, where the line of junction is visible and in the general direction of the rocks inland, numerous quarries being opened in the rocks of scurdie to obtain materials for repairing the roads, and these mark the boundaries of the two rocks.
   Where the sandstone-rocks terminate, they are seen to rest upon a bed of pophyry-conglomerate. When this rock is fresh and untarnished by the weather, it presents a uniform surface ; but where it is beginning to decompose, its angular fragments become visible. These are somewhat blunt in the edges, and generally pass imperceptibly into the basis in which they are imbedded, although at times, these pieces have a smooth surface on one or two sides, as if a little worn by attrition, while at the other extremity, they blend with the general mass. The whole bed is composed of the same kind of rock,—a claystone, with numerous crystals of earthy felspar. This bed is upwards of twenty feet in thickness, and rests upon a bed of slaty-sandstone-conglomerate, or a sandstone in apparent fragments, imbedded in a basis of a similar composition, and possessed of a slaty fracture. The pavement of this sandstone, would have been invisible, had not a slip taken place, by which the strata are better exposed, and the sandstone is seen to rest upon a bed of porphyry- conglomerate, precisely similar to that which forms its roof. To this last bed of porphyry, succeed strata of amygdaloid, in many places passing into trap-tuff.
The amygdaloid varies much in its composition. The basis in some cases, appears to be wacke, in others claystone or compact felspar. It often assumes a homogeneous aspect, and passes into massive compact felspar, felspar-porphyry, or por-phyritic-slaty-felspar. In other cases, the felspar passes into clinkstone, basalt, and greenstone, containing small specks of diallage. In this assemblage, I observed several partial beds of finegrained sandstone, of a grey, greenish, or brown colour. In some places, these occur in connected masses, upwards of a hundred yards in length and breadth, while they do not exceed a foot in thickness. It is impossible to consider these in any other light, than as beds of sandstone, originally deposited in the places they now occupy, as their direction is always conformable with the surrounding rock. In one place, I observed a partial bed of sandstone, in the form of flat anastomosing branches; the intermediate spaces being filled with clay- stone-porphyry. In another place, the sandstone was imbedded in felspar-porphyry, into, which it passed by an insensible boundary, and included portions of the felspar, whose surfaces were intimately incorporated with the sandstone. All these rocks, which I have mentioned as included in the amygdaloid, are seen to traverse it in the form of contemporaneous veins. Even the sandstone in one place formed a vein, intimately united with the amygdaloid at the sides, and having the direction of the slaty fracture parallel with the surface of the bed ; in this respect differing from a true vein. It was about six inches in breadth, and could be traced for several yards.
   The vesicles of the amygdaloid, are frequently very small, but in general they are from half an inch to three inches in diameter, of a globular form, and in some instances compressed and clubshaped. These lengthened vesicles observe no particular direction in the bed, being sometimes parallel, and at other times perpendicular to its surface. When the rock is soft, these vesicles occur in greatest abundance ; where it is very hard and dense, they are seldom observed. These vesicles are filled with various substances, as limespar, quartz, flint, calcedony, jasper, and green-earth. This last-mentioned substance often fills up entirely the cavities, at other times only partially. Quartz and calcareous-spar frequently occur together ; and the form of the crystallization of the calcareous-spar is generally impressed on the quartz. Calcareous-spar and calcedony are often associated together in the same cavity. These balls of agate are completely insulated in the bed, and in general are separated from the rock bv a thin film of green earth or clay, so that with a blow they are readily detached. When in a state of decomposition, the different concentric zones separate like the coats of an onion, each exhibiting all the features of a perfectly hollow sphere.

   The structure of this bed of amygdaloid, leads to the conclusion, that while a general disposition to stratification prevailed in the aqueous menstruum, there existed a number of partial spheres of aggregation. Thus, while one portion of the fluid was depositing grains of calcareous-spar and quartz, and enclosing these with wacke, claystone or felspar ; another portion was depositing basalt, clinkstone and greenstone, together with nodules of flint, jasper, and calcedony, in the form of agate-balls.
   It appears evident from, simple inspection, that these agates must have formed a part of the original composition of the rock, as the yesicles in which they occur, are in many places so numerous, that if empty, the rock could not sustain its own weight, much less the pressure of the super-incumbent strata. Had these agates acquired their form and structure from fusion by means of heat, the soft clay which often encloses them, and in many cases fills a portion of the same cavity, must have been melted at the same time, and the fnable enclosing rock would now have exhibited in it§ superior induration some of the marks of igneous influence ; yet the clay continues loosely aggregated, and the enclosing rock, even where in contact with the agate,» can be scratched with the nail. Besides, had these balls of agate ever been in fusion, we could not have expected to find, as we frequently observe, the fusible crystals of carbonate of lime impressing their form on the infusible quartz, nor a large empty cavity occupying the centre of the mass.
   The Wernerian hypothesis, which supposes these agates to have been formed by infiltration subsequently to the deposition of the bed, is equally liable to objections. Passing over the difficulty of accounting for the origin of these cells, by the extrication of air from the rock during its formation, we cannot conceive it possible for any flinty solution to have transuded through the pores of the soft bed on its way to fill the empty vesicles, without depositing some siliceous matter in these, and giving to the rock a greater degree of consolidation than it is known to possess. No umbilical cord of agate exists to point out the infiltration opening. And it is no uncommon thing to observe, in the same vesicle, a number of spherical concretions composed of concentric coats, and all enveloped in a continuous covering of agate, and surrounded with a crust of green-earth or iron-shot clay.
   These facts, in the history of agate-balls, prove their simultaneous formation with the rock in which they are enclosed. They in this respect resemble the uniform ironstone which occurs in slate-clay, and the globular masses of flint imbedded in chalk. These three phenomena have so many points of resemblance, that any theory formed for the explanation of one of them, ought to explain the appearances exhibited by the others.	
    There are no Veins of any consequence traversing the strata of this district. Veins of calcareous-spar and heavy-spar do occur, but present no circumstances in their history deserving of particular notice.
    The rocks of the Redhead, appear to belong to the old rod sandstone formation of Werner. This formation stretches across the island from the western to the eastern sea, and flanks on both sides the Grampian Mountains. On the south bank of the Murray Frith, it commences near Speymouth, and stretches towards Naim, and includes valuable beds of limestone, as at the Bridge of Find- horn and Inverugie near Dufus. The limestone, at the latter place, contains a considerable quantity of lead-glance, and irregular masses of flint and calcedony. On the eastern coast, it commences near Stonehaven in Kincardineshire, and extends to the River Eden in Fifeshire. The southern boundary extends westward by Cupar, the north side of the Lomond Hills by Kinross, Alva and Kippen, towards Dunbarton. In the red sandstone of this district, are included many subordinate beds of porphyry, greenstone, clay- stone, clinkstone, compact felspar, amygdaloid,, trap-tuff, slate-clay, and limestone. The rocks which I have described, as occurring in the neighbourhood of Dundee, form a portion of this district; and the Hills of Kinnoul and Moncrief, near Perth, and the extensive range of the Ochils, all belong to the same formation with the red sandstone, and occupy a place in it in the form of beds.
   The relations of the red sandstone of this district, with the older and newer rocks, are very distinctly displayed. At its northern extremity, Colonel XMRIE, in his valuable section of the Grampians from the plains of Kincardine to the summit of Mount Battock, has traced its junction with the transition rocks on which it rests. At its southern extremity in Fifeshire and Clackmanan, it is covered with the strata belonging to the independent coal formation. This fact of the red sandstone being the fundamental rock of the coal-field of the Forth, was first pointed out to me by a very intelligent observer, Mr R. BALD of Alloa, with whom I had an opportunity of examining that part of the Ochils, on which the Clackmanan coal-field rests, in the month of September 1807 I had previously been convinced, that the independent coal formation was newer than the red sandstone, from an examination of the coast of Renfrew and Ayr, (May 1807,) as X observed a junction of the two formations at Ardrossan Harbour, where the strata of red sandstone stretch nearly north and south, and dip to the east at an angle of about 30°. Over these strata of red sandstone, are deposited beds of whiter coloured sandstone, slate-clay, limestone, slate- coal, clay-ironstone, and greenstone. These are unconformable, as they stretch from east to west, and dip to the south. Near the line of junction, the newer strata are much inclined, but they approach nearer to the horizontal position, as they recede from the red sandstone
   The coal-field of the Forth, seems to rest in a cavity of the red sandstone, with which it is surrounded,. On the north, it terminates at the red sandstone district of Fifeshire, and on the south, it is cutoff by the same rock at Tranent; the red sandstone there appearing, stretching eastwards by Haddington and Dunbar, westwards to the Pentland Hills, and south to the transition country of the Lammermuir, where it ceases. Between liaddington and Dunbar, the red sandstone contains beds of limestone and clinkstone- porphyry, and probably the other trap rocks occurring in that neighbourhood, and considered at present as members of the newest floetz-trap formation.


