Art. X.— Flora Scotica; or a Description of Scottish Plants, arranged according to the Artificial and Natural Methods. In Two Parts. By WilliamJackson Hooker, LL. D. Regius Professor of Botany in the University of Glasgow, &c London, 1621.
The naturalists of Scotland have frequently been reproached for neglecting the study of botany, and for being indebted to their Southern neighbours for the most perfect lists of their native plants. We are of opinion, however, that this charge has been rough against them without due consideration, and that it admits of demonstration that the vegetable productions of this country have been extensively and successfully investigated by native observers. It is true, that two Englishmen have published, in succession, a Flora Scotica, but the materials, in both cases, have been chiefly obtained from Scotsmen. Our botanists have been sufficiently numerous and industrious; but it is a singular circumstance in their history, that many of the most acute and zealous among them have been prematurely cut off, and the plants they once took delight in examining now flourish over their graves. It is impossible to enumerate the names of Ure, Mackay, Jteattie, Sommerville, Don, and Stewart, without awakening numerous melancholy recollections in the minds of the surviving cultivators of the science.
The earliest attempt to enumerate the native plants of Scotland, with which we are acquainted, was made by James Sutherland, in the year 1683, inhis Host as Medicus Edinburgensis, or, " A Catalogue of the Plants in the Physical Garden at Edinburgh." This work, while it displays the flourishing state of botanical science in Scotland at that distant period, exhibits its author as intimately acquainted with the Flora of the country. The species which he has enumerated, as natives, exceed six hundred in number. It is much to be regretted that the habitats, or situations of the plants, are omitted, as many of the species are still reckoned of rare occurrence, and are eagerly sought after. He has here inserted the Astragalus glycyphyUos,Convallaria tncyalis, Ornithogalum luteum, Lavatera arborea, Typha angustifolia, and Botrychium Lunaria.
In the Scotia Illustrata, (1684,) Sir Robert Sibbald published a more enlarged catalogue than that of Sutherland, adding, at the same time, thehabitats of some of the rarer species, together with remarks on their medical virtues. There is attached to this catalogue a list of the wild plants found in the King's Park at Edinburgh, which contains nearly all the species afterwards given, in a similar list, by Yalden, and published as an appendix toLightfoot's Flora Scotica. 
We cannot here refer to such observers as Sutherland and Sibbald, without recollecting Sir Andrew Balfour, by whose interest the former obtained the situation of Intendant of the garden, and by whom the latter was encouraged and assisted. Sir Andrew had the merit of making known the Ligusticum Sct>ticum, Pulmonaria maritinta, and Rubus chamazvwrus, as indigenous plants.
The two works we have now quoted, contain the only attempts by native botanists to enumerate all the wild plants of Scotland. They are deficient in habitats, and destitute of scientific arrangement. But, though no other general systematical attempts have been made, the vegetable productions of particular districts have been studied with considerable care, and extensive lists of the species published.
The earliest example of this kind was made by Wallace in  ‘’An Account of the Islands of Orkney,'" London, 1700. The list contained in this work is respectable in point of extent, as it contains upwards of 270 species, many of which are still considered as rare. The Flora of Orkney was still farther augmented by the publication of Dr. Barry's History of the District, chiefly, we presume, from the documents left by Mr. Low, now well known to British zoologists as the author of the Fauna Orcadensis. This local Flora received still more valuable additions from the researches of Mr. Neill,which were communicated to the public in his " Tour through some of the Islands of Orkney and Shetland," Edin. 1806.
It is somewhat surprising that Sir Robert Sibbald, in his various topographical works on Stirlingshire, Linlithgowshire, Orkney, Zetland, and Fife", should have noticed the vegetable productions of the last of these districts only in a detailed manner. This list of the plants of Fife is perhaps themost valuable of Sir Robert's botanical efforts. It was published in 1710, and embraces in some measure the Flora of the Firth of Forth.
The next local Flora, of any extent, embraced the county of Angus, and was the production of the late George Don, well known to the botanical world as the discoverer of many new and rare indigenous plants. It is published as an appendix to Headrick's " General View of the County of Angus or Forfarshire," Edin. 1813. This is the most important enumeration of the plants of a limited district ever presented to the public, in this, or in any other country. The species are exceedingly numerous, and many of them of uncommon rarity. This observer possessed in an extraordinary degree, acuteness of perception, a retentive memory, and invincible zeal. These were exclusively directed to botanical pursuits, and, in a great measure, to the exanimation of Scotish plants. His numerous discoveries published in " English Botany,1' and in his own " Fasciculi of Dried Plants," are monuments of his success. And it is fortunate for his own reputation, and the interests of science, that he was induced to compile the Angusian Flora.
Besides these catalogues of the plants of extensive districts, several lists have been published of those species which occur within more confined limits.
In the posthumous works of Dr. Walker, the celebrated professor of natural history in the university of Edinburgh, many important observations are communicated, illustrative of Scotish plants. In the Essays on Natural History, Edin. 1808. some of the rarer species found in Icolumbkil, Jura, theBasse, and Collington, are enumerated, together with minute descriptions of several kinds of willows. In his " Economical History of the Hebrides,"many valuable remarks occur on pasture plants and weeds, which the compiler of a Scotish Flora will find deserving of an attentive perusal.
It is impossible to mention the name of Dr. Walker, without bewailing the loss which his botanical fame has sustained. It is well known that he had explored the vegetable productions of Scotland, not merely with an industrious, but a philosophical eye, and that he was more intimately acquainted with the extent of our Flora than any dead or living botanist. But he neglected, during his lifetime, to publish his numerous observations, and the works now quoted include all which have appeared since his death. Many of his manuscripts are in a finished state, and ought to be given to the public. His herbarium, instead of being scattered about among different collectors, and parcels of his rarest specimens sold along with their herbaria, should be deposited in the museum of the college, where it is to be hoped it would share a better fate than the one which Sir Andrew Balfour bequeathed. It is not long since his collection of minerals, including many specimens illustrative of the geographical mineralogy of Scotland, were lying in one of the low damp rooms of the college, (perhaps they still remain,) covered with dirt and grease. His zoological collection, exposed to similar treatment, has been in a great measure annihilated by the combined influence of the mites and moths. Such, indeed, is the respect which we entertain (and it is not cherished inconsiderately,) for the memory of this great but neglected naturalist, that we are persuaded, that had he, in his vigorous days, published a Flora Scotica, it would have been the best work of the kind in Europe, and would have placed its author among the first botanists of the eighteenth century.
The rare plants in the neighbourhood of our two great cities, Edinburgh and Glasgow, have been investigated with considerable success, and extensive catalogues have been published of the species which have been detected. These lists are singularly useful to the students attending the lectures on botany, and to others who may attach themselves to the subject tor amusement.
We have already referred to Sibbald's catalogue of the plants in the King's Park at Edinburgh, and to Yalden's additions. A more enlarged field was at length explored by Mr. Maughan, and the result of his researches, and those of other botanists in Edinburgh, published in the Memoirs of the Wernerian Natural History Society, vol. i. p. 215.
The botanical rarities of the neighbourhood of Glasgow have been investigated with equal success. The late Rev. David Ure, minister of Uphall, and a keen intelligent naturalist, in his "History of Rutherglen and Kilbride, Glasgow, lTOS," enumerated the rarer plants which occur in those districts. This list has recently been greatly augmented, partly by more minute examination, and partly by embracing a more extended field. We here refer to the valuable Flora Glottiana of Mr. Hopkirk.
With a very few exceptions, the treatises to which we have now referred, contain nearly all the information which has been published, illustrative of the vegetable riches of Scotland. . A few observations occur in the Philosophical Transactions, in the Linnean Transactions, and the various systematical works on British botany. Let us now attend to the two attempts which have been made by our English friends, to collect these scattered observations, and exhibit in a Scotish Flora all the ascertained indigenous plants of the country.
The Flora Scotica of Lightfoot, in two volumes, octavo, was finished in 1778, and introduced into general circulation in 1792, under the protection of Mr. Pennant, at whose request it was compiled. Many of the descriptions are extended and popular, and nearly all the species are included which had been previously recorded. The additions ore numerous, and derived from his own researches, and the liberal communications of friends. Among these the names of the Rev. Dr. Burgess of Kirkmichael, in Dumfriesshire; of the Rev. Dr. Stuart of Lussr in Dumbartonshire; and of Dr. Hope, Professor of Botany in the University of Edinburgh, are recorded with gratitude, it is to be regretted, however, that the learned author did not take more pains in distinguishing those plants which had been previously recognized by Sutherland, Wallace, and Sibbald, from such as he had been able to add. The history of Scotish botany would have been elucidated by this distinction instead of obscured by the indiscriminate compilation.
For many years past this work of Lightfoot has been out of print, and the numerous additions to the Scotish Flora, contributed by subsequent observers, rendered it a very imperfect catalogue of our native plants. The want of a new and more enlarged treatise on the subject was generally felt, and frequently called for. Dr. Hooker, who at present so ably fills the botanical chair at Glasgow, has attempted to supply this deficiency, and to give to the world a new Flora Scotica, suited to the improved state of the science.
This work is comprised within the moderate compass of an octavo volume, closely printed. It is divided into two parts. In the first of these, the plants included in the first twenty-three classes of the Linnean system are described, and arranged according to the artificial method.
The distinguishing characters of the classes and orders are altogether omitted, a defect which will prove exceedingly inconvenient to many who may become possessed of this work, and with whom it may constitute the whole of their botanical library. A very few pages of letter-press would have contained all the necessary illustrations. Each order is frequently subdivided, and the groups, which are not named, are distinguished by peculiar characters. The generic marks are given under the respective orders, and not again repeated at the head of the species which they include. These marks are briefly expressed by essential or factitious signs.
The description of a species usually occupies three, paragraphs. The first of these is devoted to the specific character, and likewise contains references to one or more good figures. We confess that we were surprised to observe so many of the characters copied from other works, and such culpable negligence in the punctuation. The second paragraph contains notices of the places of growth, with the authority on which the habitats rest, the time of flowering, and the duration of the plant. In the third are contained interesting remarks on the peculiarities of the plant, the varieties which it exhibits, and the mistakes into which botanists have fallen in reference to its synonimes. As an example of the manner in which the subject is treated, we shall here exhibit to our readers the characters of the first genus and species of the work.
In the arrangement of the MonocotyiedoHous and Dicotyledonous tribes, new characters are given to the genera, differing in some cases from those of the same genera in the first part of the work. An instance of this occurs in the case of Iigustrum, of which, in the first part, page 2d, it is said to have a 2-celled berry, while in the second part, page 229, the berry is said to be but 1-celled. In addition to the amended generic distinctions, the specific characters are repeated from the first part of the work, without any alteration. This has occasioned an addition of upwards of a hundred pages to the work, without any advantage being gained. In our opinion, the only use of the artificial method is to discover the name of a plant, while the object of the natural method is to unfold its structure and affinities. The whole work should have been constructed according to the natural method of arrangement, and, in order to facilitate the researches of the tyro, a synoptical view of the artificial classes, orders, and genera, should have been prefixed, with a reference under each genus to the page of the natural method where the species were described. By following such a plan, every possible advantage would be derived from the employment of both methods, and useless repetition avoided.
From the analysis which we have now given of this important work, the reader will be led to expect that we pronounce it a valuable addition to the botanical science, not of Scotland merely, but of Europe. There is no work in the united kingdom to be compared with it, for accurate discrimination of character, and judicious distribution of species, especially among the Acotyledonous tribes. We confidently anticipate its favourable reception in the botanical world, and earnestly recommend it to the attentive perusal of every student of Scottsh botany. Indeed it is the only work in the English language, which exhibits the modern divisions of the cryptogamic tribes.
The excellence of this publication might have been anticipated from the well-earned reputation of the author of the Monograph of the British Jungcrmanma, the Micsci Exotici, and Museologia Briiannica; and the contributor to the " Historia Fucorum," and the Linnean Transactions. Intimately acquainted, however, with the science of botany, as the author of the work before us is known to be, we are reluctantly compelled to state, that he appears to have a limited knowledge of the history of the Scotish Flora. His residence, however short, in this country, and his peregrinations through some of its remote districts, may have made him acquainted with the localities of the greater number of our native plants; but it would have required likewise, a critical examination of the published lists, and a correspondence with the known cultivators of the Scotish Flora, to have been able to assign to each observer his due proportion of merit. From this task, the performance of which appeared to be indispensibly necessary, the learned author seems to have shrunk back, and to have confined his attention, among the published lists, to those of Maughan and Hopkirk. With the others, indeed, he does not appear to have been at all acquainted. This neglect may be accounted for, from the total absence of any thing like a Scotish feeling, a local interest, or early associations. But, from whatever cause it may have arisen, it has injured materially the value of the book, as the following observations, among many others of a similar kind which might have been offered, will, we trust, yield conviction to the author himself.
In the valuable list of the plants of Angus-shire, Mr. Don has given the names and habitats of many species, particularly among the cryjitogamous tribes, which have not found a place in this Flora Scotica. Even the Myriophyllum VcrticiSaium has been overlooked, although noticed as a native of Scotland by Sutherland, and mentioned by Mr. Neill, Ork. p. 188, as occurring in the loch of Airie, in Stronsay. The same inattention to the history of Scotish botany is evinced in some of his remarks on particular species. Thus in a note under Veronica anagallis, it is said, " not included in the Flora Glottiana, and "probably rare in Scotland, though common in England.TM Yet, besides the habitats which he has quoted, it is recorded by Mr. Neill as a native of Orkney, and by Mr. Don as a denizen of Forfarshire.
Our author, in consequence of thus neglecting to study the printed documents, has been reduced to the necessity of borrowing his information in some cases, when, with great ease, he might have consulted the originals. This is strikingly displayed in two cases, of which we shall here take some notice. Under Eriocaulon septangnlare we have the following observation: "said to be discovered in " 1768, by Mr. Robinson, a pupil of Dr. Hope's,in the Isle of" Skye." Had the figure and description of this plant, given in the Philosophical Transactions for 1769, vol.59, p. 241.
There are several new genera introduced into this work, with which Scotish botanists are probably not familiar. These, however, are sanctioned by high authority, and, in general, justified by the importance of their distinguishing characters. Indeed, wherever the superior divisions have been accurately established, and proportionally augmented, no inconvenience can arise from the increase of genera. In botany, they are still too few, as the extent of the genera Carex and Saiix abundantly testifies. But with the increase of new genera, we do not perceive the necessity of changing the ancient trivial names of the species. Dr. Hooker has been betrayed into this error in several instances, an error meriting the severest censure, and for which no excuse can be devised. It loads the science with the lumber of synonimes, and perplexes and misleads the student. Even our old acquaintance, the Conferva polymorpha, hallowed in our remembrance by the figure of its fructification, given by our zoophytical friend Ellis, in the Philosophical Transactions, is here translated into the genus Hutchinsia, and changed into Jastigiata.
We now take our leave of this valuable work, by assuring its author, that amidst so much excellence, it has given us pain to have been compelled, in the discharge of our duty, to pass the slightest censure. All the defects of the work have obviously arisen from the hurried manner in which it has been compiled. His public duties, and his other labours in the field of his favourite science, have, perhaps, compelled him to bestow less attention on its construction than he knew was requisite for its perfection. But he makes ample amends in the training he bestows on our young botanists. Not satisfied with lecturing, and exhibiting specimens in the class room, he conducts them to the woods and the glens, and explores along with them the margins of Loch Earn, and the summit of Benvorlich. With propriety, therefore, we may congratulate the student who has an opportunity of deriving instruction from such a master, and the university of Glasgow, in possessing so accomplished and zealous a professor.'

