Although the penetrating genius and perseverance of Ellis elucidated the characters of many species of Sertulariae which occur on our shores, much yet remains to be done, in order to complete the history of this beautiful tribe of zoophytes. Since the days of our British Lynceus, however, few observers have turned their attention to the study of these animals, so as to make us acquainted with new species, or to extend our knowledge of the economy and distribution of those which have already been described.
In 1800, Mr Adams published a description of what he considered a new species, and which he termed S. imbricata, in the 5th Vol. of the Linnean Transactions, p. 11. Tab. 2. fig. 5.—11. M. Lamouroux, however, in his valuable work "Histoire des Polypiers coralligenes flexibles," p. 184. appears to entertain doubts of its animal nature, and to consider it as belonging to the tribe ofsea-weeds. The imperfect description, and the indistinct figures which are given in illustration of its characters, justify such suspicions, and point out the necessity of a new examination of the species, before its station can be assigned with any degree of confidence.
The Sertularia pennatula of Ellis, (Zooph. p. 56. Tab. vii. f. 1, 2.), supposed to be an oriental species, is a native of the shores of Devonshire. This discovery we owe to the late George Montagu, Esq. well known as the author of Testacea Britannica, and the Ornithological Dictionary, who, in a letter dated 27th December 1808, informed me of the circumstance, and subsequently transmitted a very fine native specimen. This celebrated zoologist had paid great attention to the zoophytes of the English shores; so that his death, which took place while arranging the information which he had collected during a long period of active research, may be regarded as a national loss. In consequence of my entreaties, he composed the paper on British Sponges, which appeared in the Memoirs of the Wernerian Society, Vol. ii. Part 1. and which exhibits the fruits of much industry and acuteness. Had life been spared, it was his intention to have methodised his observations on the Linnean genus Alcyonium, of which, from his letter, dated 2d November 1811, it appears that he had determined nearly forty British species! Fortunately for the interests of science, his valuable collection was purchased by the public, and now forms a part of the British Museum; so that we may look with confidence to Dr Leach, the zealous and intelligent zoologist to that establishment, for an account of the numerous rare and undescribed species which it contains, the monuments of the merits of his deceased countryman.
In the month of November 1808, I observed a new species of Sertularia among the refuse of the oyster-boats at Newhaven, and, in the following year, I found the same species, both at Aberbrothick and in Zetland. It approaches, in its structure, the S. verticillata of Ellis's Corallines, p. 2. No. 20. Tab. xiii. fig. a, but differs from that species, besides other characters, in its irregularly disposed, and nearly sessile cups. Having communicated specimens of this zoophyte to my scientific friend and correspondent, Mr Montagu, he recognised it as a species which he had foundon the shores of Devonshire, and on which he was disposed to bestow the trivial name dumosa.—But I cannot, at present, enter into the details of the history of this or other new species, having already wandered far from the object of the present communication, in which I proposed to myself to give a description of the Sertularia gelatinosa of Pallas, with some remarks on its history and economy. S. gelatinosa. Stem composed of tubes; branches in pairs, divaricate, sub-alternate; denticles on foot-stalks, alternate, bell-shaped.
The base of this Sertularia, by which it adheres to stones, is spreading and spongy, and consists of numerous closely interwoven tubular fibres, which rapidly approach to form the stem.
The stem rises to nearly a foot in height, and is so flexible as to move with every agitation of the water. It is thickest at the base, where it consists of numerous tubes; but as these diminish in number, until, at the top, there can only be perceived a single branched thread, it tapers gradually to a point. It is nearly straight throughout, and is seldom divided.
The branches are disposed round the stem in nearly an alternate order, and as they are longest towards the base, and gradually diminish in length towards the summit, a graceful tapering outline is produced. They occur in pairs, which have their origin nearly at the same point. They are not formed from the external tubes, as in some of the other Sertulariae with compound stems, but from the central ones, those at the surface turning aside to admit their exit. These branches proceed from the stem in nearly a perpendicular direction, and diverge from each other at an angle of about 45°. Each branch is acutely conical, giving out, towards the base, subordinate branches, likewise in pairs, similar to those on the main stem; at last these become alternate, and, gradually shortening, the subordinate stem supports only alternate denticles, and either terminates in twin denticles, in a single one, or in a clavate mass, containing the rudiments of a future denticle and polype.
The denticles are terminal, and are supported on short footstalks which issue from the stem in an alternate order. They are bell-shaped, somewhat produced, with an entire margin.
The vesicles are ovate, approaching to cylindrical, with a contracted truncated mouth, covered with a hemispherical lid. They are solitary, nearly sessile, and arise in the divisions of the branches or of the foot-stalks of the denticles. At the point of separation of the larger branches there is usually a small twig, supporting two or three denticles with vesicles.
The stems are of a brownish colour, opake, and of a firm tough consistence, but in approaching the extremities they become soft, colourless and transparent, so that the central stem of the polype can be easily distinguished. Immediately above every division, whether formed by a branch or foot-stalk, there are several transverse wrinkles, varying in number, being seldom fewer than three, or more than six. Similar wrinkles occur on the foot-stalks at the base of the denticles. The stems, at the divisions of the branches, are a little thickened, while the foot-stalks at the base of the denticles are slightly attenuated.
The body of the polype is distinctly visible through the transparent covering. In the branches it is somewhat dusky, but becomes paler towards the denticles. The foot-stalk of the polype, which corresponds with the foot-stalk of the denticle, is narrow, but it suddenly enlarges in the denticle to form the body, nearly of the same shape with its covering, at the summit of which the tentacula are disposed in a circle. These are about twenty in number, linear, blunt at the extremity, and divided into about ten rough raised joints. Above the circle of tentacula there is a globular head, containing the mouth. The polypes are not very irritable; for, even when pricked with a needle, they seldom retreat completely within their covering, and when left at rest, soon expand themselves, the summit of the body becoming even with the margin of the denticle, and the tentacula diverging or folding backwards on its external surface. When in an active state, I have observed the water taken in at the mouth descend, for the space of several seconds, through the gelatinous parenchyma of the body and foot-stalk, and again return to be ejected. The fluid thus circulating, did not seem to move in a solid body through tubular vessels, but to be divided into minute globules, which permeated a cellular structure.
In general, there are several principal stems adhering to the same stone, and a few younger ones springing up at their base. In the situation in which I have observed them, they are never permitted to outlive the winter, being cut off during that season by the drifted ice. They appear to be very common in the Tay above Balmerino, towards Flisk beach. It is at this latter place only where I have observed them in situ. Here the water is brackish, and its other conditions, as influenced by the tide, have been detailed in my paper on the "Junction of the fresh water of rivers with thesaltwater of the sea," in the Trans, of the Royal Soc. of Edin. vol. viii. p. 507,-513.
This species is vivacious, the polypes bearing to be kept out of the water for more than a day without perishing. It is indeed a littoral species, living in places left dry every tide. When kept in water, without being changed, the polypes soon contract within the denticles, and the body of the polype ceases to be visible in the stems. In some specimens, which I had neglected for upwards of a fortnight, the water not having been renewed during that time, I found all the polypes in the denticles shrivelled up, and numerous white threads projecting from the branches. Upon examining the origin of these threads, I found that some of them proceeded from the base of the stems, but in general they were formed from an elongation of the foot-stalk of the denticle, its cup having disappeared. The filaments consisted, as in the stalks from which they proceeded, of a soft covering, and a contained medullary cord. The extremities of these filaments were club-shaped; and soon assuming the form of a denticle, gave opening to the tentacula of a polype which had been formed within. The base of this new denticle was annulated, as in the older ones.
In the same pools with this Sertularia, may be observed the; Tubularia ramosa, and a Flustra which does not appear to have been described. The latter I first found in 1806 on Leith shore. It differs from all the other British parasitical species, as pifosa, dentata, lineata and membranacea. The F.bullata of Soilander and from him copied by Stewart and Turton, is merely the CeUipora pumkosa in its perfect state. This new species, which I have termed F. unicornis, spreads its thin crust on fuci and stones. The cells are contiguous, oval, with a blunt conical process at the summit of each. It often covers the stem of the older specimens of this Sertularia. Both the Sertularia and Tubularia are much infested with several species of Vorticellcc, among which the beautiful V. polypina is preeminently conspicuous. A small species of Coryna has likewise presented itself, whose characters have not as yet been sufficiently ascertained.
The preceding description agrees in so many particulars with the characters which Pallas gives of his Sertularia gelatinosa, that I have adopted his trivial name without any suspicion. There is, however, one point of difference on which it is necessary to make a few remarks. Pallas, when describing his species, says (Elenchus Zoophytorum, p. 117.) of the mouth of the denticle, "margine eleganter crenato," while, in the species which I have described, the margin is plain and even. But, from the variety of aspects in which I have viewed the denticles, in reference to the structure of their mouth, and having used different magnifying powers, I am satisfied that their margins are even, and suspect that Pallas has been misled by some appearances which likewise presented themselves to me in the course of observation. The polype frequently retreats into the denticle only imperfectly, leaving the extremities of the tentacula visible above the margin, thereby giving it the appearance exhibited by the S. volubilis, in Ellis's Cor. Tab. xiv. f. A. It is only when pricked with a needle, or left without water for a short time, that it retreats completely within the cell, and permits the margin to be viewed distinctly ; precautions which, it is probable, Pallas did not adopt. Besides, the numerous vorticellae which occupy the surface and margins of the denticles, give to the latter in certain combinations a crenated appearance.
Upon comparing the characters which this Sertularia presents, with the different figures in Ellis's Corallines, I am led to consider Tab. xii. f. c C, and Tab. xxxviii. fig. 3., as representations of young specimens of the same species. These figures were certainly never drawn from specimens of S. geniculata, partially figured at Tab. xii., No. 19. b B, to which Ellis himself was disposed to refer them, and in which opinion he has been followed by Pallas; nor from S. dichotoma, with which Solander (Zooph. p. 49.) assimilates them; for the two species, although belonging to the same natural genus, are specifically distinct. From having examined this Sertularia in various stages of growth, and having seen it assume exactly the appearances which Ellis delineates, (with the exception of not having noticed the young polypes in the act of issuing from the vesicles,) I am convinced of the propriety of adding to the S. gelatinosa of Pallas, the references to the figures of Ellis which have been quoted.
This species forms a part of the new genus Laomedea of Lamouroux, in the work already quoted, with a note subjoined, "an hujus generis?" To this question it is not very difficult to return a satisfactory answer. If either the Laomedea antipathes, which he first describes and figures, or the L.(Sertularia) spinosa, Ellis's Cor. Tab. xi. No. 17., which he quotes, be considered as the type of the genus, then the Sertularia gelatinosa does not belong to it. But it is related to this genus, if these species and others analagous be ejected, and L. (Sertularia) dichotoma and geniculata be retained; for with these it has many points of resemblance, agreeing in the pedunculated denticles, and axillary vesicles. The Sertularia muricata,which he has likewise appended in the same genus, presents characters very distinct from all those with which it is associated. I possess a new species nearly related to the latter, from Loch of Belfast, given to me by Mr Templeton of Orange Grove, a gentleman well known as an accomplished botanist, and to whom the British Fauna is indebted for the Ephydatia (Spongiu, Lin.) canalium, examples of which I have likewise obtained, which he found adhering to the wall of the lock of the canal above Lisburn, 22d September 1810.
While some Sertulariae, having stems consisting only of a single tube, are able to support themselves such as S. abietina; others, equally simple in structure, require the support of other holies, as the S. volubilis; while in a third tribe, several tubular stems are united for mutual support, in such a manner, as to produce a compound stem, equally uniform in its outline, and symmetrical in its arrangement, as those in which the stem is simple, —such as S. verticillata, halecina and gelatinosa. But, along with these differences of structure, there is no corresponding arrangement of denticles and vesicles, so that this character which appears at first sight natural, is in reality but of subordinate importance.
The S. gelatinosa is not recorded as British by Berkenhout or Turton. It is noticed as such, however, by Stewart, in his Elements of Natural History,p. 444, without any reference or authority. Pallas indeed quotes, "Corallina confervoides, gelatinosa alba, geniculis crassiusculis, pellucidis, Ray, Syn. p. 34. No. 7.," as synonimous with his S. gelatinosa. Ellis considers the species of Ray as the S. spinosa. We suspect that Ray referred to neither of these species, but to the S. geniculata, with which his characters strikingly correspond. It is not probable, that so acute a naturalist would have omitted the distinctive characters of the species which we have been considering, had it ever come under his inspection.
As soon as circumstances permit, it is my intention to submit the genera and species of British Zoophytes to a critical examination, for the purpose of extricating them from the confusion in which they are involved, adding to their number several undescribed species which I possess, and preparing for the investigation of the extinct races which occur in a fossil state in the strata of Scotland.

