The neighbourhood of Edinburgh presents a very remarkable assemblage of different rocks, and several interesting mineral epedes, important to the student of theoretical and practical geology ; yet it was not until the close of the last century that their characters began to be studied, or the resources of science called upon to furnish the requisite illustrations. Previous to this period, our Scottish observers were principally occupied in "mine-hunting," and under the auspices of Sir Bevis Buimer, Stephen Atkinson, and other "menerall men" of that ilk, every rock, ravine, and river were explored in search of gold and silver, and reported, in many instances, as being found in places where, in later times, they have been sought for in vain. Thus, in the preface to the translation of a French account of the life of James V., printed in a volume entitled, " Miscellanea Scotica" (London, 1710), it is said "the Laird of Marchestone got gold in the Pentland Hills," The reader who wishes further information respecting the treasures disclosed during this active metallurgic era, will find considerable entertainment by the perusal of The Discoverie and Historie of the Odd Mines of Scotland, by Stephen Atkinson, written in the year 1619." An edition of this curious work, with additions, was published by the Bannatyne Chib in 1825. Notices of the discoveries of this period may likewise be found in the various topographies of Sir Robert Sibbald In his ‘Scotia Illustrata," and in connection with this district, he merely notices, under the head of Bitumens. But in the work quoted above (p. 84), Sibbald has stated, on the authority of Colonel Borthwick . The attempt to unfold some of the first principles of geology was begun in Scotland by George Sinclair, Professor of Philosophy; but the results which he published in the "Misctxllanv,  accompanying his treatise on "The Hydro&tan ticks" (Eilinburgh, 1672), have met with unmerited neglect. Professor Sinclair is known, indeed, to a few inquirers, as the first individual in Scotland who repeated the experiment of Ptuical on the different heights of the mercury in the barometer at the bottom and top of mountains, selecting Arthur Seat as the field of his operations, and to many as the reputed author of Satan's Invisible World ;" but we have not found an acknowledgement of his illustrations of the the structural character of the coal-measures,  unless we consider as such a couple of condemnatory remarks by Mr Milne, in his memoir on the coalfields of the district, to which we shall shortly make reference. In his preface to the Hvdiostatid Sinclair says that there is added a short history of coal which I hope will be acceptable to some ; this, so needful a subjects never being treated of before by any. In it mention is made of things common to coal in general, as dips, risings and streeks.
Next, of goes or dykes, which prove so troublesome to the working of coal. Thirdly, of damps and wild-fire. Next, a method is taught for trying of grounds where never any coal was discovered before. And lastly, the manner how levels or conduits under ground ought to be carried on for draining the coal and freeing it of water." In the course of these illustrations, he satisfactorily establishes the existence of clokedamp (carbonic acid) in a coal-pit at Tranent, and of firedamp (dicarburet of hydrogen) at Werdy. 
In the spring of 1783, the celebrated Dr John Hutton laid before the Royal Society of Edinburgh his leading views of a "Theory of the Earth," which afterwards appeared in 1788, in the first volume of the Transactions of that body, and afterwards in a separate and more extended form, in two volumes octavo, in 1795. The speculations, which Dr Hutton thus presented to public notice, did not fail to excite a deep interest in the minds of those who were occupied with the study of geology, because many recondite subjects were brought prominently forward, and fearlessly discussed, while appeals were as boldly made from the closet to the quarry — from the halt of the Royal Society to Salisbury Craigs and Arthur's Seat. Dr Hutton, without perhaps any very intimate acquaintance with minerals as species, or with rocks as constituted by their aggregation, had become fully convinced that great changes in the constitution and position of the strata had taken place, and he assigned to himself the task of explanation. There are few observers who would venture to express a doubt that sandstone, slate, and coal, were originally sand, mud, and peat. He endeavoured to determine the agent which had so greatly changed their characters, and produced the metamorphic condition ; and this agent he announced to have been heat. It is equally obvious that these strata, which were originally assorted by water under the influence of gravity, have been broken and variously displaced from their first horizontal position. He likewise undertook the task of determining the character of the disturbing agent, which he believed to have been analogous to the cause of earthquakes and volcanoes. 
Although Dr Hutton failed, in many instances, to reach the truth, by neglecting to make accurate observations, by the employment of imperfect premises, and by overlooking residual or unexplained phenomena, he, nevertheless, drew around him several kindred spirits, who screened him from charges not easily evaded, protected him from misrepresentations to which the obscurity of his style peculiarly exposed him, and expounded his views by the aid of descriptive geology of a local character. The most eminent and successful of Dr Button's supporters was the amiable and accomplished Playfair, who gave, in the '' Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory of the Earth'' (Edinburgh, 1802), a luminous exposition of the geological tenets of his friend, and thereby contributed, in a very great degree, to render these intelligible and popular. But the illustrator of Huttonianism laboured under the same defects as its founder. He had never studied mineralogy, so that his knowledge of rocks was necessarily imperfect ; nor had he ever applied himself to the task of marking their more ordinary gradations of character, their interjacencies, and their content. He appeared, therefore, as a special pleader anxious to conceal the weaker points of the case of his client, to overrate the statements which were tenable, and ever seeking to turn the attention of the reader, where practicable, to the inaccuracies of his antagonist . Sir James Hall likewise strengthened the speculations of Hutton, in no ordinary degree, by a series of well-devised experiments, rendering probable some of the hypothetical explanations of his school, and at the same time extending our knowledge of the character of mineral masses. The first of these essays was entitled, " Experiments on Whinstone and Lava," published in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, voL V. p. 44. The specimens were chiefly selected from rocks in the immediate vicinity of Edinburgh, and the results had their value greatly increased by the co-operation of Dr Kennedy, who published in the same volume a chemical analysis of three species of whinstone, and two of lava,'' p. 7& The effect of heat on these rocks was here illustrated in a very judicious manner. The second paper gave an account of a series of experiments, shewing the effect of " compression in modifying the action of heat," which was published in the Edin. Trans., voL vi. p, 71. His third contribution, and one of no ordinary value, to which we shall have occasion to refer, is styled " On the Revolutions of the Earth's surface," Edin. Trans,, voL vii. p. 139. 
The late Mr Thomas Allan's communication to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1811, " On the Rocks in the vicinity of Edinburgh," is in several respects of great value. Intimately acquainted with mineral species, and with rocks, he has furnished the most important contributions to our knowledge of Edinburgh lithology of any member of the partisans of either Hutton or Werner. 
The last production of the Huttonian school to which reference need here be made is that of Lord Greenock (now Earl Cathcart) to the Royal Society, 1833, having for its title "A general View of the Phenomena displayed in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh by the Igneous Rocks, in their relations with the Secondary Strata ; with reference to a more particular description of the Section which has been exposed to view on the south side of the Castle Hill" This paper is chiefly occupied with hypothetical views respecting " the apparent interstratification of the trap and secondary rocks." In another communication to the same Society, his Lordship offers "General Remarks on the Coal Formation of the Great Valley of the Scottish Lowlands," and has made reference to the rocks of the neighbourhood. 
The school of geology which Hutton had thus succeeded in establishing may be said to have flourished during the twenty years which succeeded the first exposition of his views in 1785. But during this period, however, there were three individuals who exercised a considerable influence on our local geology, irrespective of the speculations referred to. Among these, Dr Walker, who honourably occupied the chair of Natural History in the University, deserves the earliest notice. The lectures which he delivered to the students on that branch of his course which he treated of geology must have been highly interesting, if we may judge from the various entries, which appear in his Institutes. Besides, he directed the attention of his pupils to the condition of rocks, and afforded them important assistance in the use of discriminating characters, evidently employing as his guide the judicious labours of Wallerius. This is well exemplified in his Classes Fossilius, a small treatise on minerals and rocks, indicating an advanced state of information on the subject ; and in a fragment of " Description of Strata," given in Adrick'a Arran, p. 237. No one can peruse the brief autobiography of this intelligent man, in the Edinburg Philosophical Journal for January 1822 (voL vi. p. 83), and bear in mind the hard fate of his wasted collection and scattered manuscripts, without a deep-felt conviction that justice has not been rendered to his memory. 
Thirty-five years ago I published the following remarks in connection with Scottish Botany (New Edinburgh Review, Oct 1821), which seem equally called for at the present time.  
These remarks produced some effect, for we find Professor Jameson, shortly thereafter, furnishing, from Dr Walker's manuscripts, in his possession as one of his trustees, the autobiography to which we have referred. At its close, the following remarkable passage and note occur : — " The catalogue of my collection contains 1569 species and varieties of minerals, arranged under the above genera ; but of these there are so many duplicates and varieties of less note, that the number of specimens may probably amount to above 3138. These, however, do not form the whole of my collection. They are extracted from the general raster of my museum, which contains many minerals, that, for want of examination, could not be inserted in their proper place in the catalogue. In the note appended, it is stated. 
The collection, which we saw at the time referred to has never been arranged and brought to public sale has disappeared in some mysterious manner, no one in the college being able to tell when it was removed, or where it has been placed!! 
While the lovers of science belonging to Edinburgh have cause to bewail the wasted collections of Sir Andiew Balfour and Dr Walker, they have not less case of sorrow at the fate of the collections and the funds of the late Dr Thomson, who by will, dated Palmno, 14th May 1800, destined them to be applied for the promotion of Mineralogy  as a branch of natural knowledge in the University of Edinburgh. The management of the property was vested in the Lend Provost and Magistrates, and, in 1821, they realised to the extent of 511 : 4 : 2, together with a valuable collection of minerals, with cabinets for their preservation. In consequence of the bankruptcy of the city the interest or annual may now be regarded as only equal to J?45. Four-fifths of this sum were to be employed as salary to the Lecturer, and one-fifth in preserving and increasing the collection. The annual became available after the death of an annuitant in February 1844. So early as 1808 the Professor of Natural History received the appointment to this office, and thus swallowed up the Lectureship, removed the possibility of rivalship, and secured the use of the collection for the illustration of his lectures, which at this period were almost exclusively occupied with Mineralogy and Qeology. The Council at this time commenced fitting up the old Humanity Class Boom for the reception of the collection and by the 4th Aug. 1813, '' Bailie Johnston reported that the valuable collection of minerals had been arranged in the museum.'' 
To this hour no separate Lecturer on Mineralogy has been appointed ; the fluids have gone into the pockets of the occupants of the chair of Natural History, and, assuming that the class has been conducted according to the " Institutes " of Walker, and as afterwards by Jameson, mineralogy in Edinburgh has derived no benefit from the bequest. The collection, declared by the donor to be " valuable and inestimable," admitted by Professor Jameson to have " materially enriched the museum," and who became bound on his receiving the Lectureship " to preserve in good order the whole collection of minerals" this collection has been spoiled ; its most valuable specimens mixed up with the public collection, and handed over to Government by the Magistrates, its guardians ; and ita wreck of unnamed materials stowed away in three boxes, labelled " Thomsonian Collection," and deposited in a room under the Library ; while the cabinets have been lost or appropriated to other purposes. The Magistrates became bound to visit the collection annually, but no visitation ever took place. The fifth of the annual has never been applied in preserving and increasing the collection, but, under the countenance of the Council, went for six years along with the other four-fifths into the pockets of the qiuisi lecturers. Thus the funds have been misapplied, and the beneficent intentions of Dr Thomson systematically evaded.
The second author who enlarged the bounds of our local geology, was Williams, who published in two volumes octavo, "The Natural History of the Mineral Kingdom." His detailed account of the coal-measures of the neighbourhood, their contents, and derangements, greatly advanced the study of practical geology, not only in Eldinburgh, but throughout Scotland. Mr Milne, in his " Memoir on the Mid-Lothian and East-Lothian coal fields," presented to the Royal Society in 1838, and published in the 14th vol of their Transactions, p. 253j and in the following year produced in a separate form with additions, has passed a very severe censure on the labours of Williams. He says, " Williams, in his ' Mmeird Kingdom' (published in 1810), gives some information regarding the direction of the Gilmerton and Loanhead ooal-seama But the information contained in both these works " (Sinclair had been referred to), " even respecting the coal strata, which alone they professed to treat of, is extremely vague, and generally very erroneous'' This is the first time that such a sweeping condemnation of the descriptions of Williams has been uttered, and to be satisfied of the groundlessness of the charge, the facta stated by Williams and his judge require only to be compared. It seems probable that Mr Milne tried Williams by the geological standard of 1810, the year he assigns to the publication of the work, instead of 1789, the year in which it actually appeared. Mr Milne does not seem to have been aware that the work of 1810 was a second edition, which additions by James Miller, M.D. 
The third author who, during this period, illustrated the character of the strata around Edinburgh, was Townson. In his '' Tracts and Observations in Natural History and Physiology " (London, 1799), he dedicated a portion of the work to " Remarks on the Mineralogy of the Environs of Edinburgh,'' in which he illustrated the character of the Calton Hill, Salisbury Craigs, and Arthur's Seat, in a manner highly creditable to his discernment as an observer. His view of the structure of Arthur's Seat, in particular, is in accordance with the most recent determinations of its arrangements ; and yet, passing strange, the statements of this author have not been noticed, or in any degree referred to, by any of those authors we have mentioned, or are yet to notice, who have occupied themselves with our local geology. 
Being much surprised by the fact, that none of the local observers to whom I had access, seemed to be aware of the existence of such a work, I communicated to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 20th April 184K), the most interesting passage : 
This remarkable silence in reference to the labours of Townson is the more inexplicable, when we find in a biography of Jameson by his nephew, that he was not only aware of the views of Townson, but read a paper before the Natural History Society of Edinburgh, having this title, " An examination of Mr Townson's Description of Arthur's Seat." 
We now enter upon the consideration of another interesting era in the history of the geology of Edinburgh, in which the doctrines of the school of Werner were destined to exercise a powerful influence. The appointment of Professor Jameson, the favourite pupil of Dr Walker, to be his successor in the chair, in 180, raised high expectations, and they were speedily realised. The notions of the Huttonians at this period respecting the laws of superposition of the strata were very defective, scarcely amounting to perceivable glimmerings. But Professor Jameson, intimately acquainted with the geognosy of Werner, speedily began to group the rocks of the neighbourhood into their distinct formations, and to assign the relative position of our Transition Rocks, Old Red Sandatonc, and the Independent Coal Formation. This important step, in the process of our geology, was followed by a system of prelections, accompanied by excursions to the more important localities where the phenomena could be studied in the field, and produced a number of zealous observers, who have not only extended the knowledge of the structure and contents of this locality, but of the United Kingdom and its dependencies. The published contributions to the geology of Edinburgh furnished by Professor Jameson directly, it is to be regretted, are few in number, but they are of great value. Among these may be mentioned 
The pupils of Professor Jameson have, to a considerable extent, supplied the reserve of their master, and furnished many important communications illustrative of the geology of Edinburgh, to a few of which we shall now briefly advert. It may be requisite, however, to state that, when it is known that these individuals not only enjoyed the privilege of attending the lectures and excursions of their preceptor, but had ready access to him for the removal of their doubts, there is very great difficulty in determining the amount of merit due to each, and separating the opinions and speculations of the pupil from those of the teacher. 
The first communication of this sort, which claims precedence in time, is by Dr Hibbert, "On the Freshwater Limestone of Burdiehouse, in the Neighbourhood of Edinburgh, belonging to the Carboniferous group of Bocks. Although the subject of organic remains was evidently in a great measure new to the author, yet we owe to his zeal, on this occasion, a valuable addition to the palaeontology of his district. The fossil fishes and plants of that very interesting deposit, the  Burdiehouse Limestone,'' were figured and described, perhaps not very scientifically, while the 
relations of the marine and freshwater limestone to the contiguous coal-measures were, for the first time, attempted to be established. The credit of the paper, however, we must add, is injured by insinuations of ill-treatment from others, apologies for his own blunders respecting his Saurian prejndicea, and by a dogmatising style altogether unsuitable to one who was feeling his way through comparatively unknown materials. Still, Dr Hibbert did excite a certain amount of zeal for the study of organic remains, unfortunately not encouraged in other quarters, and which the late Secretary of the Royal Society, Sir John Bobison, effectively strengthened. With these convictions, we willingly adduce the testimony to the same effect given by Lindley and Hutton in their " Fossil Flora." " To tile Royal Society of Edinburgh also, as a body, the scientific world are deeply indebted, they having promptly stepped forward, at the suggestion of Dr Hibbert, and with a power which could be commanded by no individual, rescued the fossils from destruction and dispersion, preserving to themselves one entire set, which they most liberally lay open to all those who feel an interest in them."' 
The next communication to which we shall refer is of small compass, containing, however, valuable materials — viz., " On the Fossil Organic Remains found in the Coal Formation at Wardie, near Newhaven," from the pen of Dr Patterson of Leith, and inserted in the Edinhurgh New Philosophical Journal, for July 1837. This observer, though opposed to Dr Hibbert in reference to the marine or lacustrine origin of the limestones, &c, of the neighbourhood, being far more intimately acquainted with fossil plants and fossil fishes, has communicated a list of species, with remarks illustrative of their character, which cannot fail to aid the studies of the young paleontologist. 
Here, and in connection with organic remains, would we briefly refer to the discoveries and labours of an individual who contributed towards the elucidation of the intimate structure of recent and fossil organisms, to an extent of which few seem to be aware, and to which fewer still have the honesty to do justice. To the late William Nicol, Esq., Ihverleith, Edinburgh, the students of fossil organisms are indebted for the processes by which thin slices of petrifiictiona can be prepared, so as to permit the application of the microscope to the examination of their intimate structure. It is to the processes and the manipulations of this observer that we are indebted for our knowledge of the relation of the fossil trees of Craigleith and Grantoit Quarries, to the firs, or rather to the Araucarias, of the present day. Indeed, without borrowing from the resources of Mr Nicol, the work of Witham on fossil vegetables would have possessed little interest — the " Fossil Flora" would have been greatly limited, while the "Odontography" might not have had a being. Justice may for a time be withheld, the mantle of a John Hunter may be worn as the property of a Sir Everard Home, and other names may be in the place which Nicol's should occupy, but ere long the truth will prevail, and the merit of original discovery and observation be recognised. It may be added, that the valuable collection which Nicol formed was bequeathed to his friend Mr Alexander Eryson, who is not only capable of appreciating its value, but who, possessed of equal power of manipulation, is rapidly adding to its treasures. 

In 18+6 Mr Rhind published his little volume, under the title " Excursions illustrative of the Geology and Natural History of the Environs of Edinburgh." The object and plan of this work are alike commendable, but the resources of the author, at the time, were not equal to the task. 

The communication of Mr Milne, now Mr Milne Home, "On the Mid-Lothian and Eaat-Lothian Coal Field," to which reference has been already made, abounds with much imports and information, collected with great industry from twenty-two of the coal proprietors and managers of the districts, respecting the structure and dislocations of the coal-measures. The author has likewise treated of the ' Superficial Strata " in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, with a fulness of detail which gives very great additional interest to his memoir, 
Another communication to be noticed is that of Cunningham " On the Geology of the Lothians," to which the Wernerian Society adjudged a premium of twenty sovereigns. This Essay contains many interesting descriptions of the relations of the strata, but is singularly defective in its references to organic remains. Yet the author somewhat unguardedly observes 
The last of the treatises illustrative of the geology of Edinburgh, which we shall notice, is Mr Maclaren's important " Sketch of the Geology of Fife and the Lothians," Edin. 1839. It abounds with detailed descriptions of the rocks of the neighbourhood, accompanied by sections and diagrams of the more interesting phenomena, and has aided, to a very great extent, the researches of the private student. In too many instances, however, the author has indulged in hypothetical explanations, and has, in a great measure, overlooked the organic contents of the strata. The work has been for some time out of print, and a new edition, believed to be in the press, has been long and anxiously looked for. 
In addition to these communications, we may mention that several references to the lithology of Edinburgh occur in the writings of Faujas Saint Fond, Webster, Bou, L. A. Necker De Sanssure, J. Nicol, and others. To the observations of these authors we shall endeavour to do justice, as opportunity offers. 
From the preceding remarks, the reader may be disposed to conclude that our knowledge of the lithology of the neighbourhood of Edinburgh is extensive, that the subject has been handled by many intelligent observers, and that very little remains to be done, except perhaps to collect and arrange, in a more convenient form, the observations which have been already secured. This, however, would be a very inconsiderate conclusion, for the very same remarks which fell from the pen of Mr Allan thirty-five years ago, are at the present moment  as applicable as ever. " 
We all think ourselves perfectly acquainted with the rock on which our Castle stands. But I suspect there are many members of this Society who will be surprised to learn that sandstone occurs near its summit and also at its base. Salisbury Craig and Arthur Seat appear perfectly familiar to us ; there are phenomena belonging to both, however, of which, I have no doubt, many are yet 
ignorant." —
Considering the length of time during which mineralogy, petralogy, and palaeontology have been taught in the class of Natural History, the state of our public collection is far from satisfactory. Until a very recent period, the Museum did not furnish the student with adequate resources, but exhibited, rather, attractive specimens from distant localities. The late lamented Professor E. Forbes, during his brief occupancy of the Chair of Natural History, began to collect and exhibit specimens illustrative of the petralogy of the neighbourhood, and the organic remains in our rocks, especially those belonging to the animal kingdom, would speedily have occupied his attention. There is good ground to hope that his successor in office will follow out those views which he so unequivocally expressed and laboured so enthusiastically to accomplish. The vegetable organisms of the strata around Edinburgh are beginning to attract some share of attention, and the collection which Dr Balfour has already formed in the Museum of the Botanical Garden is calculated to aid the researches of the young paleontologist. 
The Scientific Societies of Edinburgh have to a considerable extent contributed to the progress of Edinburgh Lithology. The Royal Society has always given a certain amount of encouragement to local inquirers. The Wernerian Natural History Society, now extinct, was for several years in active operation. The Transactions of these two Societies have already been referred to, and several of the papers which they contain are of great interest. The Royal Physical Society now occupies the field which the Wernerian Society was wont to cultivate, and has given indications of a useful career. 
There is yet another institution to which the lovers of Lithology in Edinburgh may reasonably look forward, as destined to advance the interests of their favourite science — the INDUSTRIAL Museum. It is a matter of deep regret that, for the present, the funds necessary for its progress and usefulness have been ungraciously withheld. But the common sense of the public will, ere long, recognise the value of such a collection as calculated to advance the interests of society. Meanwhile, we trust that the Geological Survey will be preparing to furnish its invaluable contributions. Its staff of efficient observers and equally active collectors, may be looked to for speedily furnishing more trustworthy results, respecting the distribution and contents of the rocks, than can be expected from private and uncombined exertion. 
The remarkable irregularity of the ground in the neighbourhood of the city, and the equally varied aspect of the sky-line in every direction, have long attracted the notice of the lovers 
of landscape, and usually excite in the breast of strangers a 
feeling of intense admiration. But the eye, which has enjoyed 
a geological training, is enabled, besides being gratified by the 
same picturesque scenery, to detect groups of interesting pheno- 
mena well fitted to excite reflections of a more intellectual kind. 
The abrupt faces of the rocks, the inclination of the beds and 
their fractured contents, indicate a violent disruptive force acting 
from below, while a different agency has spent its fury on the 
surface, removing or assorting the softer materials, leaving the 
harder portions, the protuberances, ridges, or hills, as an index 
of the devastation which has occurred. 

Before, however, entering upon the details of the surface inequalities of the district, I shall take liberty to remark, that much difference of opinion prevails respecting the character of 
the forces which have been in action, their origin, and the direction in which they have exerted their influence. Hence it is 
expedient, where practicable, to attend to some of the more obvious but too much neglected elementary truths, that aid in observing the phenomena satisfactorily, and test the explanations which have been offered. 

When we examine a Valley of any extent with the eye of 
a petralogist, it will be found generally that the rocks existing 
in the trough, are softer and more easily acted upon by air and 
water than those which form the bounding ridges. Interspersed 

portions of harder rock may be occasionally found among the 
softer materials, but these will merely cause inequalities in the 
valley, and mark, by their elevation, the resistance which has 
been offered to the disintegrating forces which have reduced the 
contiguous portions to a lower level The valley of St Leonards, 
the North Loch, and that of the Hunter's Bog, may here be 
quoted as illustrative examples. 

When we examine a BAY, or indentation on the coast, we 
generally find analogous appearances. The softer beds have 
been acted upon, broken up and removed by the action of the 
ripple of wind or storm waves, while the harder materials re- 
main and constitute those promontories or Nesses which form 
the lateral limits of the recess or creek. Even in the bay, as 
in the valley usually connected with it, certain portions of 
harder rock may have existed, and such will usually be preserved in islets or skerries, to mark the abrasion which has taken place around. 

The young petralogist may witness very distinct evidence of 
this view of the formation of bays at Granton or Trinity. At 
either of these places the beds of sandstone resist the abrading 
agency of the sea ripple far more successfully than the softer 
beds of argillite or stale with which they are interatratified. 
Hence all the hollows on the beach, or indentations at the sea 
margin, can be successfully referred to their forming agent, 
acting readily on the shale, but withstood more or less by the 
sandstone; Indeed, the promontory of Joppa, the ridge of the 
Black Rocks at Leith, and the projecting portions of the shore 
at Granton, may be studied with advantage as illustrative ex- 
amples. The islands of the Firth of Forth give likewise un- 
equivocal indications of the resistance offered by the harder 
rocks, which, in general, in this quarter, belong to the trap 
fiimily. Thus the Bass, May, Inchkeith, Inchcolm, Inehgarvy, 
and others of minor bulk, plainly indicate the extent of abrasion which has taken place, and the means of their preservation;
Irrespective of the groups of rocks in the immediate neighbourhood, which we shall soon consider in detail, the spectator, looking around from the Castle, the Calton, or Arthur's Seat, will perceive Dumerous hills rising somewhat abruptly above 
the surrounding land, and all of them illustrating the truth we 
are now endeavouring to enforce. Thus, on the south, we have 
Blackford, Braid, and the Pentlands. On the west, Dalmahoy, 
Binney, and Corstorphine. On the north, the Binn, the more 
distant Lomonds, and Largo Law ; while, on the east, North 
Berwick Law is perhaps the most striking example in the hori- 
zon, exhibiting its conical mass of trap, while the softer sand- 
stone which had surrounded it has disappeared. 

In examining the physiognomy of a district, on the great 
scale, these remains of abraded strata, in the form of hills or 
hummocks of trap-rocks, are of great value, equally to the 
lover of truth and the hypothetical visionary. When examining a district petralogically and in detail, the knowledge of the 
unequal powers of resistance of hard and soft rocks to ordinary 
atmospheric and weathering influences, and the more violent 
operations of abrading agents, will be found of essential service. 
The structural character of the Calton, Salisbury Craigs, and 
Arthur's Seat, it is believed, cannot be satisfactorily determined 
without the simple guide we are here endeavouring to point 
out Indeed, by neglecting this guide, Arthur s Seat has long 
been a stumblingblock to the student, and even to a few who 
consider themselves as belonging to a higher class. The 
weathering and abrading influences, however, may sometimes 
be so conjoined in the same field as to require an acquaintance 
with both agents for the comprehension of appearances. Thus, 
in tracing the stretch of the soft and hard strata constituting 
Sampson's Grave, and having become satisfied of their direction, 
one is suddenly met by a valley of abrasion, in which the Egg 
Pond is situate, cutting the weathered and partially denuded 
hollows nearly at right angles.

As an instance of the effects resulting from overlooking the 
hollows by weathering, which invariably indicate differences 
either in materials or state of aggregation of the rocks, we may 
here notice Inch Mickery. 

Let us now trace the character of those hollows and eminences 
of the district which illustrate, in a very remarkable manner, the 
great changes which have taken place, and the agents which 
have exercised their influence. If a line be extended from the 
southern extremity of Oorstorphine Hill to the Register Office  
or James' Square, it shall skirt a platform of gravel, till, and 
rocks constituting the north side of an extensive valley, and 
which is prolonged to the sea. Towards the middle of its course, 
where the valley is considerably contracted, it is bounded on the 
south by the high ground at the Haymarket, Gardner's Crescent 
being five feet above high-water mark, and Cliarlotte Square, on 
the north, elevated 205 feet. For the present we leave out of 
view the ravine at Coltbridge, and the inequalities of the Water 
of Lelth, and other valleys to the north of this first line, because 
these belong to another system of disintegration, to which we 
shall speedily advert. 

On approaching Edinburgh from the west, the Castle Rock 
forms the most conspicuous object in the landscape, and is not 
less interesting in reference to its geological features. It is the 
commencement of a ridge, which descends in an easterly direction, and terminates at the Abbey of Holyrood. The Castle 
Rock, elevated above the low ground at the North Loch, or 
rather above the Well-house Tower, 287 feet, consists of hard 
whinstone or trap, and is well calculated to resist the destructive 
agency of water or atmospheric changes. It is otherwise with 
the strata which come in contact with the Castle Rock, and 
which with an easterly dip, occupy the ridge of the High Street 
 and Canongate. These consist of red sandstone, more or less slaty, and of very soft laminated marly clay. The character of the materials may be very easily ascertained by an inspection 
of the very fine section of the strata displayed on the south 
side of the Castle Hill. Had any violently disintegrating, 
abrading, or excavating power been exerted from the east, 
south, or north, the ridge of comparatively soft matter, extending from the Castle to Holyrood, must have been swept away, 
and the Castle Bock left as abrupt on its east as it now appears 
on its west side. But when we look at the precipitous faces 
of the Castle Bock on the south, north, and west sides, together with the very marked depression of the surface of the 
ground on all these sides, and its connection with the Corstor- 
phine fiat, any one, accustomed to examine the abrading and 
excavating effect of running water, would at once see proof in 
the characters of this ridge, embracing its contents, form, and 
direction, that water was the modifying agent, and that its 
motion was in an easterly course. If we now attempt to trace 
the progress and effects of moving water in the direction now 
referred to, we see the Castle Bock setting its destructive 
agency at defiance ; and, while the soft materials on the west 
side were readily removed and a deep excavation formed around 
its sides of resistance, the soft materials, on the lee side, were 
greatly protected, although modified in form into a sloping 
ridge, with the excavation on each side now constituting the 
Grassmarket, Cowgate, and south back of the Canongate, on 
the south, and the North Loch and north back of the Canon- 
gate on the opposite side. 

The excavating agency, thus modified by the Castle Bock, 
seems to have met with little interruption on the south side or 
Cowgate branch, but on the north side the appearances are of 
a different character. The valley of the North Loch, a continuation of the Corstorphine valley, seems to terminate, at its 
eastern extremity, in the bluff, irregular cliffe of the Calton 
Hill. Here again we have a repetition of the same phenomena 
which led us to admit the agency of water, to infer the direction of its motion, and to track the course of its abrasion. The west, north, and south sides of the hill, towards the North Loch, rise abruptly to a summit about 213 feet above the old Triuity College Church, with a sloping ridge continued eastward by Carlton Terrace to the plain of Holyrood, to which we traced the Castle ridge , of old termed the Caldton, 
the rocks consist of amygdaloid, tuff, and other materials calculated to resist the destructive agency of water ; while in other directions the strata are composed of softer materials, as 
may be seen in the exposed foundations for buildings at the Royal Terrace, where beds of sandstone and shale are well exposed. 

The trap rocks of the Caiton Hill seem to have presented 
the same obstacle to the action of the water as the Castle Rock, 
and to have afforded a similar protection to the soft materials 
on the lee side. We thus find, in tracing the valley of the 
North Loch, after passing the Castle, that it is divided by the 
Caiton Hill ; and while the southern branch, to which we have 
already referred, is prolonged in the north back of the Canon- 
gate, the other, or northern branch, passes by Greenside towards Leith Walk.

These two ridges have so many common features as to indicate unequivocally a common origin. The western portion of each consists of a mass of hard rock, while the eastern is composed of soft materials. The hard portions have resisted or modified the progress of the destructive agent, while, by being of limited extent, the ridges of soft matter which they have protected are of correspondingly small dimensions. The bifurcations of the valleys, in connection with these protecting masses, at once indicate the relation of these appearances, so familiar even to ordinary observers, with the agency to which they have been referred. But in the immediate neighbourhood 
of the city there are other places, of easy access, where phenomena similar In character may be observed, but modified by local circumstances, yet of great geological interest. Let the student who feels an interest in tracing those phenomena, so illustrative of physical geography, to which we have referred, betake himself, after examining the protecting influence of the Castle Rock and the Calton Hill, to Salisbury Craigs, where, if he asks suitable questions of nature, he will not fail to get responses well calculated to awaken his desires for beholding and tracing to a greater extent the wonders of lithology. 
The Salisbury Craigs seem to terminate at the southern extremity of the semicircular valley, where a footpath leads from the west into the Hunter's Bog. But between this footpath and the Raven's Craig, on the abrupt western face of Arthur's Seat, there is a low ridge of greenstone similar to the Craigs, of which it is a continuation, and termed from its position the Hause (or throat). 

Here the observer may trace the trap ridge of St Leonards, extending from Sampson's Ribs to Dumbie Dykes, and terminating in the Calton. The valley to the eastward is parallel to 
this ridge, and indicates the former agency, modified in its direction from west to east, to nearly south and north. This valley occurs between St Leonards and Salisbury Craigs, and 
is joined at the south back of the Canongate by the Cowgafe branch of the valley already referred to, having been continued through soft materials, occupying a part of the ridge of which 
the Calton Hill and Dumbie Djkea are portions. The soft materials of this valley of St Leonard's were probably similar to those which have been exposed at the Royal Terrace, of which, indeed, they seem to be extensions, resting and covered by the trap; while it is to be particularly noticed that the valley becomes narrow, and terminates just where the harder beds of whinstone approximate. 
The valley of the Hunter's Bog is still more instructive. It occupies a position between the whinstone of Salisbury Craigs on the west side, and the Raven's Craig and Dasses on the east, and has been scooped out of the comparatively soft materials of sandstone and clay, the remaining portions of which may yet be seen at the quarries on the west side. Like the valley on the east of St Leonards, it contracts where the hard rock of Salisbury Craigs approaches that of Arthur's Seat, but at its northern extremity it exhibits a peculiarity which establishes a resemblance to that of the Haymarket or the 
North Loch— it bifurcates, and the hard rock, with its slope in the direction of the valley, constituting the Hagois-now, has modified the excavating agency precisely in the same manner as the Castle Rock and the Calton Hill, indicating, at the same time, that the direction of the motion was south- westerly. 

Behind the Dasses and the Lang-raw, which form the eastern margin of the Hunter's Bog, is the singular valley termed the Dry Dam, which takes its rise between the Nether Hill and the summit of Arthur's Seat, follows a course nearly parallel with the Hunter's Bog, and bifurcates at St Anthony's Chapel, where it terminates, after uniting with the south branch of the Hunter's Bog at the Well Towards the head of the Dry Dam there is another valley which opens upon Dunsappie, where 
we have the excavation and bifurcation analogous to the cases which have been already referred to, the softer materials having occupied the place of excavation. 

On the Whinney Hill of Arthur's Seat there are tolerably distinct indications of what seem in their general character to resemble a river course. Running water in a channel has not only a tendency, from lateral deflections, to form a zig-zag course, but also from vertical deflections to produce a succession of fords and pools or reaches. Traces of such reaches may be observed at Sampson's Grave and other places of the hill. 
Excavations such as Duddingstone Loch, Hunter's Bog, 
Dunsappie, and Lochend, point in a very obvious manner to 
this scooping power of deflected or resisted currents ; although 
the formation of some of these hollows may be traced to different agencies, in as &r as the retention of water is concerned. 
I may here observe, that in forming the new embankment at 
Dunsappie, traces of an earlier one were very distinct, so that 
an old compensation pond for the use of Holyrood House may 
now be hastily conceived as the site of an ancient lake. 
Lochend, Duddingstone, and the Meadows were probably con- 
verted into lochs by the unequal distribution of the superficial 
strata. 

The whole phenomena which have thus been briefly noticed, 
appear to indicate, and not unequivocally, water moving over 
the surface in an easterly direction with great impetuosity. 
In order to account for this appearance, it has become fashion- 
able of late, with a certain class of speculative geologists, to assume the submergence of our island in the ocean, at which time the current, then prevailing, is supposed to have formed the hollows to which we have been referring — these oceanic currents having been assisted by huge icebergs exerting their crushing and abrading power. The elevation of the land is by such observers imagined to have taken place by sudden jerks or paroxysms, proofs of which are pointed out in certain levels or 
plains assumed to be sea margins, and in the occurrence of sea shells in what are termed raised beaches. 

We are not in a position at this stage of the inquiry to enter on the discussion of the questions connected with this supposed submergence, and elevation, because, without an attentive examination of the materials occurring on the surface, and their 
modes of distribution, inquiries too frequently executed in a 
careless manner, the imagination is very apt to mislead the 
judgment. But when we shall have instituted such inquiries 
into the superficial strata of the neighbourhood, the examination of such notions will not be otherwise than a pleasing and 
easy task. In the mean time, the character of the valleys of 
abrasion, — the hard abrupt rocks facing the west, and the soft 
protected matter on the lee side, constituting what Sir James 
Hall termed the craig and tail, warrant us in disregarding the 
agency of oceanic currents. The tides of the sea act on all 
sides of a protuberance or island, on account of ripple action 
even although the flood and ebb movements may differ in intensity. The Bass, the May, and Inchkeith exhibit no craig and tail appearances, nor is there a trace of such a character 
in the islands situate in the most rapid of our tideways — the 
Pentland Firth. If the Castle, the Calton, and Arthur's Seat 
had ever experienced the fate of the aborigines, and been 
" beaten, bobbed, and thumped," whether by tidal waves and 
currents, or icebergs vast, even granting that there was little 
wind in those days to generate destructive ripple waves, no 
appearance of a lee side would have been traceable, equalling 
in magnitude and distinctness the phenomena which have been 
indicated. If we call to our assistence the Gulf stream, it will 
not furnish us with analogous phenomena, as the Hebrides, the 
Orkneys, and Zetland abundantly testify. 


In the last chapter the conclusion was arrived at, that water had 
passed over the surface of the district with great velocity, and 
in an easterly direction, probably at successive intervals, plowing up the soft materials of the rocks, and removing them, modifying by abrasion the harder portions, and thus giving to the 
valleys and hills their peculiar configuration. Currents on a 
smaller scale and acting suddenly have frequently taken place, 
although their peculiar effects have too seldom been recorded 
in sufficient detail. The following cases, however, may serve 
as a guide to our further inquiries into a series of phenomena 
of the most interesting kind. 

Sir James Hall, by whom this department of Natural Science was most successfully introduced and illustrated upwards of forty years ago, has put on record that " a country house (in 
a neighbouring county to Berwick) situated on the slope of a 
hill, was assailed by a sudden torrent of water, produced by the 
sudden bursting of a thunder-storm on the hill above. The 
impetuosity of the stream was such, that it forced its way 
through the under storey of the house, carrying along with it 
quantities of sand and gravel and stones of considerable bulk. 
Happening to be on the spot a few weeks after the accident 
took place, I observed that every stone, as it passed through 
the house, had left a rut or scratch behind it upon the flags 
over which it passed." 

Mr Smith of Jordan Hill, who has laboured zealously and successfully in this department of petralogy, has stated 
Mr David Milne Home of Milnegraden, to whose important labours we have already referred, says, 

The facts which we have now referred to seem naturally to suggest the question, Do the rocks, by their rubbed and scratched surfaces, furnish proof that a torrent of water has passed over them, carrying stands and stones in its career ; and do these dressed surfaces indicate the direction in which the current flowed. Should satisfactory answers be obtained to 
these inquiries, and coincident with the conclusion already 
reached, from the consideration of the direction of the valleys 
and the shape of the hills, we shall be in a condition prepared to examine the other " effects produced by this mighty agent. Fortunately the neighhourhood of Edinburgh presents man
well-marked examples of dressed surfaces, neither difficult 
access nor of doubtful interpretation. Let us begin with 
nearest, or those which may be regarded as within the city. 

1. Cidton Hill. — There are two very distinct examples of 
dressed surfaces on this hill, the localities of which are of easy 
detection. The first occurs on the left side of the footpath 
which ascends from the west end of the Royal Terrace, or 
Greenside Church, to the high part of the hill. About the 
middle of the path, and ten yards west from the seat, a hum- 
mock of rock, of amygdaloidal porphyry, presents itself on the 
margin of the path, and is a continuation of the Monument- 
bed. The top of this mass is obviously rubbed even, and several parallel shallow grooves may be observed in a direction 
nearly from west to east by compass. The western side of this 
dressed surface bears unequivocal marks of its having been the 
most exposed portion, and, as the weather side, to have been 
" beaten, bobbed, and thumped," This abraded surface, on its summit and towards the grassy margin, must not be confounded with the smooth and somewhat waved face of the surface of the rock which slopes towards the seat at nearly 20°. 
This last appearance is unnected with abrasion, and belongs to the structural or concretionary character of the bed. 

When the summit of this north walk, ascending from the 
east, is reached, another example of a dressed surface presents 
itself in the angle formed by the junction of the lower and 
upper north walks and to the north-east of the Jews' burialground — the rock being a continuation of the Observatory. 
Here the summit of the exposed surface is dressed and scratched as in the last example, but the strise proceed from the north of 
west more decidedly. They are not at different parts parallel, 
those on the west portion being about W. by N., while some on 
the east portion reach beyond W.N.W. There is here likewise 
a smoothed waved surface sloping northwards and down towards 
the footpath, which is due to the concretionary character of the 
rock. But this deceptive appearance may be more satisfactorily 
witnessed on the south side of the upper north walk near the 
seat, and a little to the east of Nelson's Monument, where the 
spherical concretionary masses are displayed on a large scale. 

2. Vidoi-ia Drive at Samaon'a Bibs. — On the left side of the 
road in going eastward, a hummock of rock has been judiciously 
left projecting a little from the line of the retaining wall which 
rests upon it On its upper surface there is here the same 
dressing in the direction nearly of W. to E., with the most 
abraded or weather side facing the west. This example of 
dressing is singular in this respect, that we have on its edge 
scratched lines on a sloping or vertical face, nearly parallel 
with the horizon. The appearance of horizontality must be difficult to account for by those who elevate and depress the 
land as suits their purpose. This interesting feature of abrasions, although only exemplified in this single instance and yet observed in our neighbourhood, has been witnessed by 
me on the north side of a cliff of limestone exposed in the 
course of quarrying operations at Hedderwick to the north of 
Brechin ; and on the exposed northern face of North Berwick 
Law. We have thus scratches parallel with the horizon, extending over a considerable area, and in both cases, but especially the former, the dressing agent had acted from the west. 

3. Salisbury Graiga. — On ascending the crest of the Craiga from the south-east at the Uause, until the margin of the great quarry be reached, the road from the Queen's Park to Newington will be opened opposite to a pretty large surface of the greenstone rock sloping towards the Hunter's Bog. One set of scratches may be observed running nearly E. by W., and the dressing is remarkable as occurring on the somewhat sheltered side of the hill, assuming the action from the west. Other 
scratches pass from W. by N., while a third group, and apparently the newest, nm from N.W. This example was first noticed by Mr Maclaren. 

4. Egg Pond. — This locality may be reached with the greatest certainty by ascending from Mushet's Cairn to the highest point of the ridge N.E. of St Anthony's Chapel, and at the northern extremity of Samson's Grave. On the south side of this interesting little basin, the basaltic rock has its surface 
dressed, the weather side obviously to the west, the quarter to which the strife point. In a basalt hummock, to the westward of the basin, there is one tolerably distinct dressed surface, but 
the striae here have a direction from W.N.W. 

5, Joppa. — In proceeding from the village along the shore southwards to the Saltpans, the first rock of sandstone which appears on the beach is dressed, the striae running between W. and W.S.W., the weather side being westward. In the former examples the loose soil, or debris, was in contact with 
the dressed surface. Here, however, the old till, or boulder clay, rests immediately on the scratched surface, and the striae may be traced continuously underneath the covering which has 
protected them from atmospheric influence. This covering 
seems to have extended, at no remote period, much further 
eastward, as dressed surfaces may be observed on the sandstone, 
where uncovered by the tide, and indicates the destructive encroachment of the sea. Indeed the wasting of the land on the shore is but too apparent from the Maitland Bum to the Black 
Gocks. These, from exhibiting traces of dressed surfaces with tilt in the neighbourhood, were probably at a comparatively recent date continuous with the present coast. 

6. Gravton. — About 130 yards to the westward of the pier, and close to the retaining- wall, there is a remarkably good example of a dressed surface of sandstone, the west or exposed side being very distinctly indicated. The scratches run nearly W. or W. by S. This is perhaps the best example in the 
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as the dressed suriae is of considerable extent, and, we may add, preserved, for its scientific value, by the considerate zeal of Mr Howkins, civil engineer, 
Granton. When I first detected this example there was but a small portion exposed, but the boulder clay which formed the immediate covering of the rocks has now been greatly washed away, and a wall erected to save farther encroachment from the sea. A little to the westward, however, this clay may still be detected in its original position. 

These six examples, which cannot be too strongly recommended to the study of the earnest observer, are at present in existence, and of easy access, Otter and equally instructive 
examples are from time to time occurring, and may be looked 
for whenever the rock is tirred, or the clay or gravel removed, 
preparatory to quarrying operations. Thus fine examples were 
displayed a few years ago on the trap at St Margaret's Station 
of the North British Railway. Similar appearances occurred 
at the Grange Cemetery, at Eurdiehouse, Craigleith, and Red- 
hall. At the latter quarry the surface of the sandstone, on the 
cover being removed, presented one set of scratches, directed 
W. and R and another S.W. Other operations at the same 
place may again unfold similar appearances. 

Before closing the results of these personal observations on 
the dressed surfaces of the neighbourhood, we shall notice two 
other examples of considerable interest from their peculiarities, 

7. Torduff. — This hill consists of feldspathic rocks, and is 
situate to the westward of Bonally near Colinton. On the 
south-west side a considerable extent of dressed surface was detected ten years ago, and pointed out at the time to Lord 
Cockbum, Sir Charles Lyell, Professor Pillans and Mr Mac- 
laren. There is no appearance of the rock having been recently covered by clay or gravel, so that the preservation of the scratches must be referred to the hardness of the material, which is but feebly acted upon by the weather. 

8. Thomson's WaRa. — This locality is to the eastward of the east Csjrnhill in the Pentlands, and to the west of the Compensation Dam on the Ilsk, above Carlop& Here a portion of the sandstone rocks had been exposed by tirring for quarrying operations, and, immediately underneath the soil, a thick layer of yellowish clay, with stones, had protected the surface of the rocks from atmospheric influence. The scratches were from west to east, and constitute the most elevated example which we have as yet detected, the place being, according to Knox's Map of Mid- Lothian, 1 400 feet above the level of the sea. 
According to Sir James Hall, after reviewing his numerous observations, " the direction of the stream in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as indicated by the medium result of a number of observations, appears to have been from 10° S. of W. to 10" N, of E. by true bearings taken with a needle, and allowing 27^° W. of N, as variation (1812)." The examples which he has given are chiefly in connection with Corstorphine Hill, a map of which, with the localities marked, he has added to his paper already referred to. We insert the following as indicating the attention which he bestowed on the appearances. 
Before dismissing this part of the subject, it seems expedient  to advert to certain appearances which frequently occur in rocks, and which may be mistaken for proofs of dressing by a hasty or prejudiced observer, and in addition to a few warnings already given on the subject .

1, Crumpled 8iLrface8.—We do not here refer to the variety of this structural character of beds, denominated Ripple-marks, because the grooves and ridges anastomose in a manner totalIy distinct from the nearly parallel scratches which we have been considering. But when the crumplee observe a particular direction, and consist of narrow parallel ridges, they may readily suggest a dressed surface. A fine example of this character occurs in Arthur's Seat, towards the northern extremity of the porphyry bed denominated the Daesee, and more recently by Mr Maclaren, the Bog Crag. This bed stretches nearly S. by W., with a gentle rise of about 1 6° from its northern extremity, 
where it sinks under the grass at a short distance from the road leading to St Anthony's Well, along the west aide of the Haggis-Now. The easterly dip is about 23°. Considerable portions of the surface, six to eight feet in breadth, are bare and exposed to the weather, immediately adjoining its western 
edge. This surface is marked by numerous small parallel ridges, seldom reaching to two inches in breadth, very shallow, scarcely exceeding half an inch in depth, occasionally preserving 
for a couple of yards their distinctive character, at other times slightly waved, but, throughout, exhibiting generally continuous parallel linear arrangement. The line of greatest slope, as indicated by the slide of the boys at the spot, is nearly W. and E., but the direction of the groves is about N.N. W. or perhaps more nearly 20° W., and they incline to the horizon at about 10° to the east. At a little distance from the margin of the Dass where the crumpled surfaces are exposed, a quantity of debris 
from the Angraw, about twenty-five yards distant to the east, the equivalent of the Loch craig on the south side of the hills, conceals the covering beds of sandstone, the equivalent of those 
of Windy Gowl, which there rest on the Hangman's Knoll, the equivalent of the Dasses. 

The shallowness of the grooves, the very near approach to equality of size, and their direction being different from that of the valley (the Hunter's Bog) in which they occur, lead us at once to reject the idea of an iceberg or glacier, nor can we admit of a current of water moving in any direction or presenting stronger claims. The proximity of the grooved surface to a high impending ridge to which the lines are neither parallel nor perpendicular, likewise renders such causes inadequate. To an eye accustomed to look at dressed surfaces, the absence of of that even ribbed ground on which the scratches are impressed will readily be perceived. When I read a description of this appearance before the Royal Society of Edinburgh, it was supposed by some volcanists, that && the bed of trap was a lava, these crumplings took place in its molten state, when flowing over or insinuating itself among the sedimentary beds. But upon inquiring more extensively into the phenomena, it will be found that it is a structural character, not exclusively exhibited by rocks of a supposed igneous origin. Thus, at Joppa quarry, a bed of the sandstone exhibited on the surface parallel markings as distinct as those of the Dasses. The bed occurred on the south Bide of the north portion of the quarry, and near to the placq where the aigillarian stems (probably S. packyderma) are seen in the sandstone covering the ancient soil on which they grew. 
It is seldom, indeed, that we find the contiguous surface of the strata of a bed approaching to even. They are generally more or less waved, and these crumples are more frequently displayed 
on a larger scale than either at the Dasses or at Joppa. Thus, at the old quarry at Salisbury Craigs, which has been already noticed as the locality of dressed rock, the surfaces of the strata 
of greenstone, which have been exposed by the quarriers, display the crumples with tolerable distinctness. But they are nowhere exhibited more satisfactorily than at the glen of North 
Ctermiston, and at the place marked No. VI. and VII. by Sir James Hall on his map, The crimplings here can be traced on the surface of a stratum of the soft decomposing greenstone, 
passing under the covering stratum — the under surface of the imposed bed being a cast of the waved surface of the one on which it rests. It is probable that some of the crumpled surfaces at this place have been mistaken for dressed ones ; and the cast of one of these in plaster, presented to the Royal Society by Sir James, serves greatly to confirm the saspidoii. We may here add, that very well marked examples of parallel crumples are at present observable in the surfaces of the strata of clinkstone at Blackford, and of the sandstone at the new-quarry at Granton. 

2. Sw/ctcfifl of Fissures, — By fissure we mean a fracture or 
dislocation, extending through several beds, and to an unknown 
depth. When such fractures are attended with displacement, 
they are termed slips ; when the fissures have their margins 
squeezed and broken into fragments in a somewhat irregular 
manner, they ore termed troubles by the miner ; and when 
sufficiently wide, and filled with foreign matter, they are called 
dykes. The surfaces of rock which form the sides of fisBittes 
denominated slips are very frequently, especially on the ends 
of the harder beds, rubbed and scratched in a manner very 
closely resembling the dressed surfaces which we have been 
considering. In almost all the sandstone quarries of the neighbourhood such rubbed surfaces may occasionally be observed. 
Some rather indistinct examples occur in the greenstone bed 
of Saliabmy Craigs, towards the northern extremity of the 
ridge. But the most expressive example, presently accessible, 
occurs at the south-east comer of the Castle rock, where the 
old red sandstone beds bend down to underlie the trap. A 
large surface facing the east may here be studied to advantage. 
Such fissures indicate very plainly that the fractured surfaces 
have been displaced, and, in the course of the change or subsequently, have been rubbed against each other. The position, 
however, of such faces, if carefully examined, will prevent their 
being confounded with surface dressings.

3. Surfaces of Flaws. — When the breaks or fractures are confined to a single bed, and give no proof of displacement or sliding, I have been in the habit of calling them Flaws. 
They occur in all directions in the bed, separate, or united, with the 
opposite surfaces smooth and waved. In the soft materials, 
such as coal, steatite, or shale, these surfaces frequently exhibit 
a specular polish, and by colliers are termed glazed backs. 
These flaws have been referred to shrinkage from the escape 
of volatile matter, and their specular character to the casting 
or impression, under great pressure, from a liquid or gaseous 
surface — a feature in which they resemble the Derbyshire 
slickenside. The position of flaws in the bed, and the grooved 
surface traceable into the rock, may readily indicate its differ- 
ence from a dressed surface. But as the two appearances, how- 
ever different in their origin and character, have been confounded, 
I shall hero make a reference to two instructive localities. 

In the bed of porphyry exposed on the north end of the 
road leading to the Calton by the back of the High School, 
many characteristic smooth striated surfaces of flaws are ex- 
hibited, which evidently belong to the structural character of 
the rock, and are unconnected with surface dressing. But the 
most magnificent example in the hill is on the south high walk 
behind the seat to the east of the monument in the Observatory- 
bed, to which we have already referred. The other example 
occurs near the dressed surface on the Victoria Road above 
Samson's Ribs. In going eastward, after emerging from St 
Leonard's valley, the first rock on the right is an amygdaloid 
full of flaws. A few yards farther eastward, on the opposite 
side of the road, the rubbed surface No. 2 occurs, so that the 
two phenomena can be satisfactorily compared. 

The last marked surface to which we shall make reference, 
is one exhibiting characters so very remarkable as to have 
perplexed, in no ordinary degree, several of our local geologists.

In these two quotations, descriptive of the same example of 
an abraded surface, I have proof, after actual examination, of 
very defective observation as well as unwarrantable deductions. 
The abraded rock is not clinkstone, as Mr Maclaren states, but 
a trap tuff, which seems to be graduating into the old red 
sandstone conglomerate, on which the hill probably rests, and 
which stretches westward from Liberton, giving occasion to the 
valley between Blackford, and Braid. The scratches are not 
"in a direction approzimating to horizontal," for they have 
various inclinations from horizontal to 60". The direction of 
the scratches cannot be "nearly east and west," as stated by 
Mr Miloe Home, for the dressed surface has a direction nearly 
from N.W to S.E., and faces the S.W. The protuberances or 
irregularities of the abraded surface are all rounded on the 
N.W. side, giving unequivocal proof that the abrading agent 
acted from that quarter. Even assuming that the gravel and 
sand were not originally the abrading agents, the statement of 
Mr Mitue, that these "must have been brought from, the east- 
ward," is improbable, when the position of the face of the cliff, 
as already noticed, and the materials of the mass are kept in 
view. The sand is very distinctly stratified nearly horizontally 
or slightly inclined, and adheres with considerable firmness to 
the surface of the rock. It is a natural concrete, the particles 
being held together by carbonate of lime, probably due to in- 
filtration. In some places the abraded face is nearly vertical, 
in others it slopes northwards underneath the projecting mass 
at an angle of 50°. 

The abraded surface has not been acted upon uniformly, like 
the dressed ones which have now been considered. It exhibits 
an irregular series of dimples with shallow grooves of small 
extent, as if the abrading agents had been subjected to fre- 
quent shiftings and intermittent pressures. While some of 
these acted on the vertical face, others have been squeezed 
under the projecting cliff, and have escaped by a downward 
course. Floating ice and driven gravel may, in conjunction, 
have furnished such a result, but I feel warranted in conclud- 
ing, that, if the examples of dressed surfaces which have been 
enumerated, were produced by glaciers or icebergs, the Black- 
ford hill example is not entitled to a place among them. It 
seems to be a local phenomenon, .connected with the Braid 
bum, and is probably of more recent formation than the 
dressings. 

Several years before the description of this abraded surface 
by Mr Maclaren and Mr Milne Home appeared, but overlooked 
by these authors, Mr Rliind has referred to the phenomena, 
and unhesitatingly indicated its mode of formation.
We refrain from commenting on such description and 
explanation. 

The young observer should be on his guard against being 
deceived by different kinds of weathered surfaces, such as may 
be observed at almost every quarry. When the exposed 
portions of the rock have been acted upon by river currents, sand, or sea gravel thrown up by storms, the abrasion may be great, but will present an irregularity very different from the obvious levelness of a dressed surface.  The exposed ends of the strata at the new quarry at Oranton, where this spurious appearance was recently displayed, may be studied with advantage, 
for they have successfully deceived even experienced geologists. 

Before leaving this part of the inquiry it may be noticed, that 
the craig and tail, and the dressings, coincide in their indications of the abrading agent having acted from the west. The other effects which it produced now require to be investigated. 


Satisfactory evidence seems to have been produced to prove 
that the direction of the valleys and the shape of the hills 
plainly indicate an impetuous body of water moving and acting 
in an easterly direction ; it may be at various and distant inter- 
vals. Proof has likewise been furnished that substances capable 
of scratching the solid rocks have been pressed along their cropping, and have left an even and rutted surface, with the ruts 
indicating the force to have acted from the west These coincidences being recognised, we have now to consider what has 
become of the detached matter and the rubbers which were the 
agents of the abrasion. But this inquiry necessarily involves 
the consideration of all the stratified or unstratified materials 
which rest on the dressed surface, and to what extent these 
materials were derived from the operations of that destructive 
agent, to which we have already so frequently referred, either 
immediately or remotely. Nay more, have the strata, between 
the dressed surfaces and the present soil, a uniformity of structure and material ; or are there any proof of different agents 
having operated, and with intermittent energies, as displayed 
among the older deposits ? These questions are of deep interest, because not a few observers, while admitting a great diversity of structural character among the materials resting 
on the dressed surfaces, have usually made their selection, and while pleased with their explanation of the origin of certain beds, have, strangely enough, disregarded the vast amount of other materials left out of view. Besides, the deposits have been classified by empirical rules, and denominated by hypothetical terms, calculated to retard the study of perhaps the most iotereating group of strata constituting the crust of the 
earth. 

Upwards of thirty years ago, when referring to the changes 
which had taken place in our Fauna at or subsequent to these 
events, I remarked, that " It is customary with antiquarians in 
general, to delight to dwell on scenes which exhibit t« their 
imagination the memorials of events nearly forgotten, or the 
transactions or customs of distant ages. Events of a more recent 
kind, or transactions which may be considered only in progress, 
do not arrest their attention, or, at least, fail to excite in their 
minds that deep interest which remoter subjects readily awaken. 
The public likewise feel and act much in the same manner. 
There is an importance attached to remote events, depending 
solely on their antiquity ; while there is a vulgarity inseparable 
from recent events founded on the supposition of their being 
well-known. Geologists have long acted, and we fear still act, 
ill a similar manner to antiquaries. The study of the character of the older strata (their position, structure, and ingredients), has been pursued with greater ardour than any researches which have been entered upon with the view of illustrating the connections of the newer deposits. Coal, sandstone, 
and limestone have been examined with zeal, while few have 
bestowed their attention on peat, sand, or marl Similar 
practices have prevailed with regard to organic remains 
Many have speculated concerning the structure and habits of 
those relics which occur in the solid strata, who have not 
deemed the study of the laws which regulate the living races, 
an object of much importance." 

" We are not disposed to refer these well-known habits of the 
antiquary and geologist to any natural preference of the obscure to the extinct, — of subjects the relation of which, circumstances have rendered uh incapable of determining, to those of a 
nature which may be illustrated with certainty. We are aware that antiquarian and geological speculations are usually engaged in from motives of amusement, and, when conducted 
in the usual manner, seldom fail to gratify their votaries.
Were they to commence their investigations with a knowledge 
of recent events, and proceed by degrees to those of remoter 
times, their conclusions would assume a more imposing character, but the accompanying labour would be greatly increased. In speculating on the affinities of recent events, the 
understanding is ever occupied with facts ; the imagination, 
thus in trammels, dare not indulge in its licentious wanderings. But when remote events are the subject of our contemplation, fancy becomes a valuable assistant by reuniting 
jointed links, supplying that which is wanting, and enabling 
the mind to arrive at conclusions, which, without the labour of 
investigation, had probably been long anticipated," (Edin- 
burgh Philosophical Journal, October 1824, p. 287). 

These views, which were expressed in earnest, met with 
very unwelcome reception, especially from those whose soaring 
hypothetical propensities they were intended to restrain. Nor 
at the present hour do the remarks seem uncalled for, since 
geologists are not agreed as to the principles of the nomenclature of the materials resting on the dressed surfaces, their relative antiquity, or the agents which were concerned in their distribution. 

Dr Walker, professor of Natural History in the University of Edinburgh, to whom we have already referred, with all respect due to great attainments, treated in his Lectures of Staple, or what is at present denominated soil, and also of the " loose superficial Tiodidea" termed " Boulder-Stones," better known at present as Erratica. At a later period, and at the date, in 1822, of the "Outlines of the Geology of England and Wales," by Conybeaie and Phillips, the belief was all 
but universal, that a large portion of the materials 
the dressed surfaces, and even the dressings themselves, were 
generated and distributed by the Noachian deluge. Hence the division of these superficial deposits into Diluvium and Alluvium, the former indicating the products of the FLOOD, the latter, materials of more recent origin. 
The untenable conclusions announced by C'uvier, and so 
eagerly but rashly embraced by Jameson, Bucbland and many 
others, of " a recent and transient inundation" reckoned identical with the Flood described by Mosea, paved the way to another classification of the superficial strata. " On these 
grounds (Dr Buckland says) I have felt myself fully justified 
in applying the epithet Diluvial, to the result of this great 
convulsion ; of Antediluvial, to the state of things immediately preceding it; and Postdiluvial, or Alluvial, to that which succeeded it, and has continued to the present time." 

Many circumstances led me to consider the Geological Deluge, as interpreted by Baron Cuvier and Professor Buckland, inconsistent with the testimony of Moses and the phenomena of nature, and to disregard those divisions of the superficial strata founded on the assumption. 

When we consider that the oldest of these superficial beds 
enclose the remains of many animals belonging to species, the 
individuals of which are still surviving around us, associated 
with the remains of other species which no longer exist on the 
globe, we conclude that these extinct and still living beings 
were, at the period subsequent to the dressings, contemporaneous, as we now find them buried in the same grave. The 
badger, the red deer, the ox, and the goat, were living in 
Britain, and on the continent, when the mammoth, hippopotamus, and Irish elk were their associates. But none of all 
these have lived at an earlier period, for the organic remains 
of the so-called London clay and Paris basin beds are widely 
different, and belonged to species which evidently have suffered 
extinction, as a whole, prior to the creation of the existing 
races, and those which once co-existed along with them. Under 
the influence of these views all the materials superior to the 
dressings has been referred by me to the Modern Epoch
, while the pre-Adamic 
materials, with their organic contents, which immediately preceded them, were referred to under the denomination of Penult Epoch. 

Five years after the adoption of this classification, Sir Charles 
Lyell, whom all recognise as an enlightened and earnest geologist, under the guidance of M. Deshayes of Paria, was led to regard "the proportional number of fossil species identical with 
the recent" as characteristic of the different groups. 

In the views connected with the preceding statement of Sir Charles Lyell, there are assumptions which may be considered objectionable in many respects. The first is, perhaps, the most startling, viz., That species have perished from off the earth by no sudden destruction, but by degrees, and that species have made their appearance to succeed them by no sudden creation, but imperceptibly.* If this notion be based on 

truth, it will cause a great modification in the oommonly re- 
ceived opinions respecting chaos, and the commeDCetnent of 

the present races of animals on the globe. It leaves untouched, 
however, the proof of creative power, by acknowledging the 
appearance, from time to time, of new species on the earth, and 
it admits the destruction of species which has frequently prevailed. At present, however, we are chiefly concerned with the question. Is the notion consistent with scientific truth ? 
When we consider the quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, and fishes of the Paris and London bassin, or of the eocene period of Lyell, we do not find that a single species had survived and been coeval with any of the existing races — so that there is no interval here — no dawn. The 96 per cent, of shells, which constituted the testaceous fauna of the tertiary period, all perished, and only 3 per cent, of their companions are supposed to have survived, so as to constitute the connecting links with the succeeding or modern group. 
There is considerable difficulty in referring to natural causes capable of producing the extinction of life on Earth. Murrains, deluges, cold and hot, dry and wet seasons, and the chace may have exercised a powerfully destructive influence on the individuals of a species or even on larger groups. But these agents seem too partial in their effect to be employed in the explanation of the phenomena. As the sun, our present source of light and heat, and the apparent supporter of life, is subject to change in reference to these qualities we may perhaps find a solution of the difficulty. When the surface of the sun is most luminous or has fewest spots, there is least heat, and, according to Sir William Herschel, a bad harvest is the consequence, with high prices for wheat. When the spots are most numerous there is an abundant harvest, with consequent cheap bread. Now, were we to imagine the luminous atmosphere of the sun to increase to such an extent as to obstruct the 
radiation of the heat the interior of the inferior surface, a glacial condition would prevail 
to the extinction of life on the globe. If, on the other hand, the luminous matter 
disappeared, and our sun became a dark star, a fate which observers have ascertained as having overtaken other stars in the firmament, then the withdrawing of the light would cause a biological epoch to cease. In such circumstances, plants would parish first, and the death of animals would speedily follow. If a new display of creative power were again to take place, we might 
expect, with the return of light, that plants would first be called into being, 
and consequently animals, as dependent on them for food, either directly or 
indirectly. Such, according to the Mosaic Narrative, and in beautiful harmony 
with scientific truth, is the last recovery of the globe from a chaotic state, on 
the dark star becoming " as the sun when he goes forth in his might ;" and 
should these changes partake of a periodical character, the paleontological 
epochs may admit of a plausible, if not a satisfactory, explanation, whether 
these have been abrupt, or have partaken of a transitional character. 

But the identification of these species of the dawn has not been established, nay, by 
competent observers, is doubted and controverted. When a 
very broad generalization, therefore, like the present, rests not 
on those objects which are distinct and recognisable, as their 
remains of vertebrated animals, but on shells macerated, and 
perhaps rubbed, and thus of doubtful character, and about the 
identification of which grave doubts prevail, we feel ourselves 
justified in avoiding a nomenclature and arrangement resting 
on such slender pretensions, and regulated by an empirical 
percentage. Nor can the suspicion be avoided that the mixture of older with newer species, as those of the London clay, associated with those of the Crag, and produced by denudating 
and assorting agencies, may have been in haste misinterpreted, 
without even suspecting collectors of being ever either ignorant 
or guilty of deception. 

I have long considered, and must again repeat, that there 
has been too great a tendency to select one or two beds of this 
group, which are here considered as constituting the Modem 
Epoch, and endeavouring to explain their origin and mode of 
formation, leaving the other beds as residual phenomena, not 
sufficiently important to demand consideration, or rather, it 
may be suspected, left out of view because assuming some- 
what of an obstructive character. Thus we have diluvium,  
the result of a sudden flood ; moraines the effects of glaciers 
in abrading and assorting the materials ; drift, northern drift 
or glacial drift, the effect of glaciers or icebergs, during the 
period when an arctic climate is said to have prevailed even in 
comparatively low latitudes. 

Mr Milne Home, in his able Memoir on the Lothian Coal 
Fields, has endeavoured to classify these beds superior to the 
dressed surfaces, according to their position, a plan which we 
shall here present to our readers as a first and creditable attempt at generalization, exclusive of hypothesis.



