
The formation of siliceous minerals has perplexed, in no ordinary degree, the different sects of Geologists. The Vulcanists and Volcanists have, in vain, attempted to repel the objection brought against their views, founded, on the refractory nature of silica in the fire, amounting to infusibility. The Neptunians have been equally embarrassed with its character of insolubility in aqueous menstrua. Fluxes have been resorted to by the former, and solvents by the latter, without any thing satisfactory to the unprejudiced having been announced. It is not to be concealed, however, that several facts in the natural history of siliceous minerals, which have been established,  lead to the conclusion that solvents of silica do exist in nature, though these solvents be yet unknown to the chemist, and only appear in the results which have taken place. 
The occurrence of flint, in concretions arranged parallel to the seams of stratification in chalk, and the analogous position of menilite in adhesive slate in gypsum, intimate the existence of a condition in which siliceous and calcareous matters have been influenced by similar circumstances. In reference to the chalk-beds, it may be supposed that the substances were deposited in the state of mud, which has been since changed into flint and chalk. That such a process of lapidification has been going on in the bed, is demonstrated by the occurrence of shells, originally of an imbricated structure and compact fracture, now exhibiting the granular structure, or foliated fracture of marble or calcareous spar; yet retaining distinct traces of the albuminous animal matter. The fusion of the siliceous mud by heat, and its consequent conversion into flint, as has been conjectured to have taken place, by Mr Allan in his valuable paper “ On the Formation of the Chalk Strata, and Structure of the Belemnite,” Edin. Phil. Trans. ix. 416, is a view of the matter, the incorrectness of which is demonstrated by the appearances exhibited. How is it possible to conceive the application of any heat capable of fusing the flint distributed in layers throughout the bed, which would not fuse, at the same time, the far more fusible surrounding chalk? Yet the chalk in immediate contact with the flint is earthy, and does not exhibit any one of those appearances to be looked for in fused carbonate of lime. It is equally impossible to conceive the cavity of an echinus filled with flint in fusion, while its thin calcareous, and consequently fusible crust, shall be capable of retaining all the delicate arrangement of its parts, preserving unobliterated, the sutures, the tubercles, and the minute bronchial pores. Mr Allan seems to have been aware of all these objections, but he has been unfortunate in his attempt to obviate them. “ But we have,” he remarks, “ many such anomalies in nature; the base of many of the trap rocks presents as little the appearance of crystallization as even the softest chalk, and yet it is now admitted, even by the pupils of the Freyberg School, to be of igneous origin,“ p. 417. I was not a little amused, by thus witnessing Mr Allan, in his distress, seeking shelter under the mantle of Werner! He will find it in this case, however, but a cobweb. Let us suppose, with Mr Allan, that the pupils of the Freyberg school can view these anomalies in trap rocks, and, in spite of such testimony to the contrary, continue to believe in their igneous origin, it remains to be asked, what explanation of these anomalies can be given to one, who is not a pupil of the Freyberg school, and who does not admit the igneous formation of trap rocks. Can it be anything but a confession, that the hypothesis is opposed by the phenomena .
Flinty matter sometimes occurs in older limestones than the chalk, in such situations as to offer equally formidable objections to the igneous geologists. The specimens now exhibited to the Society seem to be of this description. They were found, many years ago, in a quarry on the estate of Kirkton, near Bathgate, West Lothian. This quarry was opened in a bed of limestone, which dips under the great bed of limestone belonging to the coal-field which extends north towards Lira lithgow. This great bed is regularly stratified, and dips to the west at an angle of about 20°. It encloses the remains of those marine animals which are common in the limestones of the coal formation, with the beds of which, on both sides, this mass is conformable. Flinty matter occurs in this bed, disseminated in irregular thin layers, or in shapeless masses, occasionally containing relics of marine animals. The bed of limestone to which we more particularly refer exhibited in some places the ordinary massive or compact structure, but in others it displayed that subconoentric Vlamellar concretionary arrangement so characteristic of caloedony. The different layers of these undulating plates presented many varieties of the botryoidal and mammillary forms. But the layers did not consist exclusively of carbonate of lime. Plates of flint likewise occurred, alternating with the limestone in parallel layers. The siliceous matter likewise abounds in the layers of limestone. When a mass of this substance is exposed to the weather, the calcareous matter wastes, and the flinty portion appears in high relief. Maceration in acid, as has taken place in one specimen, likewise exhibits its true structure. In the cavities produced by the irregular contortion of these strata, crystals of quartz, calcareous spar, and magnetic iron ore, occur.
Vegetable remains occur in this bed. Several trunks of trees, with their branches, could be distinctly traced, enclosed by the flinty and calcareous matter, as in the specimens exhibited. In some cases the woody matter was removed, and petrifaction had taken place so completely, as to leave only the traces of the original in the fibrous structure of the cast. In other cases the texture of the wood seemed to be but little altered, as the concentric zones were visible, the perpendicular fibres separable, and even sectile. These remains were sometimes of a brown colour, crossed with veins of calcareous spar. In the petrified matter, both flint and limestone abounded. The casts, except in one instance, presented no marks by which the species or genus could be determined. This example seems to be identical with the Phytolithus Plantites verrucosus of Martin, “ Petrificam DerZensia,” Tab. XI. fig. 1, and which I have found to be a common production of the sandstone, clay-ironstone, and vegetable limestone of the Lothian coal-field.
The same objections present themselves against the igneous origin of the flint in this case, as in the chalk-rocks. I may add, that I have observed calcedony in a similar position to the flint in the present specimens, in the compact limestone at Inverugie, near Dufius, Morayshire. Are we, therefore, to consider that this peculiar botryoidal structure in limestone is produced by the influence of siliceous matter with the tendencies of calcedony? We should feel inclined to adopt this opinion, were we not aware of a similar structure prevailing in 'limestone, destitute of any notable quantity of siliceous matter, as at Inchkeith.
In the cavities of the chambered univalve shells, which occur in a petrified state in our limestone rocks, no earthy substances are observed, unless in the pipe which opens externally, or in those chambers which have broken walls. In those which are closed on all sides, crystalline minerals are observed to have exclusive possession, and these are usually calcareous spar and quartz, or rock crystal. That the former, in solution, percolated the walls of the chamber, and crystallised in
the cavity, will readily be allowed, since the Neptunian character of calcareous spar cannot be disputed; but what prevents us from drawing the inference that the rock-crystal reached its station under similar circumstances?
Silicified wood occurs in alluvial soil, in such circumstances as to warrant the conclusion that the petrifying matter was brought into its present situation by the agency of water.
But the proof that siliceous matter is soluble in aqueous menstrua is presented to us in the most unequivocal manner by gramineous vegetables. In the epidermis of these plants, the silica is arranged in a symmetrical manner. It seems obviously to be a natural secretion of the plant in the construction of its ordinary integuments. Sometimes it occurs as a morbid secretion in the joints forming the well known tabasheer.
The preceding facts leave no room to doubt that silica is found in nature in the state in which it appears to have been deposited from a solution; and the following observations seem to countenance the conclusion. 
In this neighbourhood, the prevailing rocks belong to the trap family, and consist principally of amygdaloid, clinkstone, greenstone, and compact felspar, as subordinate to the old red sandstone. Where quarries are opened in these rocks, the rents near the surface are numerous, and form small cavities, the walls of which are occasionally covered with calcareous and siliceous stalactites, though always in thin crusts. In some cases, the liquor from which these have been produced seems to have been small in quantity, to have been collected in one spot on the roof, and to have left a thin film of the earthy matter not larger than the nail of the finger. In other cases, the surface covered is of greater extent, but the thickness of the matter never reaches a quarter of an inch- The siliceous matter seems to have dropped from the roof of the cavity, in some instances, on the fragments of rock, on the floor, forming stalagmites. 
The surface of this stalactitic crust is rough, and, where thickest, it rises into numerous blunt mammillary processes. In the siliceous portions, these processes acquire a degree of hardness, translucency, and smoothness of surface, approaching to calcedony.  When they are steeped in an acid, they part with the calcareous matter, and the macerated remnant intimates by its appearance that the two substances occurred in alternate layers; the calcedony, however, prevailing towards the surface.
The specimens now exhibited will serve to give a correct idea of the nature of this incrustation, and furnish evidence of its recent origin, since it invests even the loose fragments of the rock. 'We know the Neptunian origin of calcareous stalactites; and here fiey occur alternating with those in which silica predominates. Need we hesitate, then, to conclude that the calcareous and siliceous ingredients were suspended in the same menstruum, and deposited under similar circumstances P We may conjecture that the water was aided by heat, by alkalies, or by carbonic acid or carburetted hydrogen, rendered powerful by compression; but these are mere mental efforts to avoid a conclusion which the circumstances of the case justify, but which militates against our theoretical prejudices. 

