The city of Cork is situated on an extensive alluvial deposit, formed from the sediment of the river Lee. This river runs in a direction from west to east, meets the tide at the city of Cork, and after forming a frith interspersed with numerous islands, empties itself into St George's Channel, about fifteen miles to the eastward of the city.
The vale in which the Lee flows is parallel with the direction of the hills which occur in the neighbourhood. To the north of the city, there is a high continuous ridge of slaty rocks, which forms the northern boundary of the river for several miles. To the south of the city, there is another ridge, of lower elevation, consisting chiefly of limestone.
The strata are nearly vertical, scarcely ever observed declining above ten degrees towards the horizon. The dip is toward the south. The line ofbearing is by the compass, from W. N. W. to E. S. E., and this direction is observed by all the strata of the district with surprising regularity.
In stating the few particulars which I have it in my power to communicate, respecting the minerals of this district, I shall arrange my observations under three heads, corresponding to the three kinds of rocks which chiefly prevail, and to which the others may be considered as subordinate. These rocks are grey-wacke-slate, limestone, and clay-slate.
I.—Grey- Wacke-Slate.
The rocks which I here denominate Grey-wacke-slate, occur principally in the ridge to the north of the city, where, from having been quarried in several places, the arrangement of the strata is very distinctly exhibited. The rock is termed by the inhabitants Brownstone, from the colour which it usually exhibits.
The stratification of this rock appeared to me to present some peculiarities which deserve to be mentioned. I have already stated, that the strata are nearly vertical, and the direction of the stretch uniform; and the structure and fracture correspond, as usual, with these characters of position. But besides this primary direction of the strata, there may frequently be observed another, or secondary direction, at right angles to the former, by which the vertical strata are divided horizontally. The vertical primary strata experience considerable variations in their composition, beds of a harder stone being included in strata of softer materials, or the reverse. But the secondary horizontal strata are uniform, the stratum above being similar to the one below. Sometimes, however, these horizontal strata differ a little in colour for a few yards, but seldom to a greater extent.
These subordinate horizontal beds are short, the lines of separation ceasing, and new ones, parallel, but not continuous, appearing, at short intervals of a few yards. These lines of separation are distinct and waved, and are carefully attended to by the quarrymen, whose operations they contribute to facilitate.
The appearances which these subordinate strata exhibit when the section is at right angles to the line of bearing, are apt to lead an observer, at first sight, to conclude that the rock is disposed in true horizontal strata; nor will he be convinced of the mistake, until a more minute examination of thefracture of the stone has pointed out the true structure of the beds.
Two forces have been operating upon the matter of the rock when entering into its present state: One, disposing the strata to assume a vertical position, and exercising absolute control in arranging the slaty structure and fracture of the stone; while the second, less powerful in its influence, and irregular in its operations, has given rise to those waved horizontal divisions which the vertical strata exhibit.
The colour of this stone is intermediate between brownish purple-red and brownish-red. It is often clouded with irregular spots of greenish-grey.
The principal fracture, or rather structure in this case, is irregular curved slaty. The surface of the laminae is often spotted with dendritic delineations, and is glimmering, owing to scales of mica, which are in general obvious to the eye. The cross fracture is fine earthy and dull. It is easily scratched with the knife, and the streak is light-coloured and dull.
This Brownstone exhibits several varieties of character, according as the siliceous or aluminous earths prevail. In the former case, the stone is coarsegrained, thick, slaty and hard, in the latter, it is fine-grained, softer, and divides into thinner laminae. In some portions of the last variety, there are galls of a brownish-coloured powder.
This rock is intersected by numerous contemporaneous veins of quartz, from the size of a thread to upwards of a foot in breadth. In the larger veins,the quartz is compact, but in many of the smaller veins it is parallel fibrous, the direction of the fibres being perpendicular to the walls of the veins. This is precisely the manner in which the fibres of ice are arranged, when water has crystallized in a narrow crevice. In some places the quartz contains chlorite, and near Mallow Bridge, I observed small quantities of iron-mica.
Where this rock is disposed to present any variety of colour, it is in general greasy to the feel, and likewise contains steatite.
Subordinate to the rock which we have now described, occur large masses of Slate-clay. It is seldom found as a regular bed of any extent; and, at the line of junction, it coalesces with the preceding rock. It is readily distinguished, however, from that rock, by its colour and fracture. It is bluish-grey, with a tinge of green or black. In the finer kinds, the laminated structure cannot be perceived, and the fracture is even, inclining to large conchoidal. It is dull,—sometimes glimmering from intermixed scales of mica,—fragments indeterminately angular, rather sharp-edged,—opaque,—soft in a slight degree,—streak dull, and light coloured, —adheres feebly to the tongue,—easily frangible,— and feels somewhat meagre. This variety is sometimes used as a whetstone for the coarser kinds of cutlery.
In many instances, this rock becomes fine earthy in its fracture; glimmering in its lustre; considerably harder; and the fragments more blunt-edged. Some varieties of this sort bear a close resemblance to those floetz rocks which are intermediate between sandstone and slate-clay.
Subordinate likewise to the brown stone, already described, is a rock which may be called Grey-wacke, although destitute of many of the important characters of that rock. It exhibits two very distinct varieties.
The first has a basis of coarse slate-clay, with mica and iron-pyrites, and contains numerous irregular rounded masses of compact limestone. Thelimestone is of a dark bluish-grey colour, with a fine splintery fracture, destitute of lustre, and having a light-coloured dull streak. These pieces are of no determinate shape, and pass, by imperceptible degrees, into the basis in which they are imbedded. Hence these masses, and the basis, are to be considered as of contemporaneous formation.
Perhaps this test of contemporaneously formed masses, is not much to be depended upon. The petrifactions of shells which occur in the older rocks, are often so intimately united with the matter in which they are imbedded, that they appear to pass into it by insensible degrees, it being impossible to detect the line of separation. Yet, in these cases, we do not consider them as of contemporaneous formation; but conclude, that some action has taken place in the matter of the bed, subsequent to its deposition, which has exerted its influence on the substance of the imbedded shells. Examples of such changes may frequently be met with in floetz limestones; and they, perhaps, occur in other rocks containing fragments; although in these last, we have not the means of determining the original form of the imbedded masses; and, consequently, cannot trace the extent of the changes which they have experienced.
The second consists of a basis of granular quartz, with irregularly shaped pieces of bluish-black clay. These pieces resemble the finest kind of slate-clay first mentioned; only they are of a darker colour, and rather harder. Its structure in the great is irregular slaty. It abounds in natural rents, and short contemporaneous veins and nodules of quartz. There is another variety which approaches to thick slaty in its fracture, and contains a few scales of mica. In this are imbedded numerous reed-like films of a dark colour, and so closely resembling some of the varieties of sandstone, belonging to the independent coal formation, as not to be distinguished from them in hand specimens. The surface of these reed-like films exhibits rather indistinctly the appearance of vegetable impressions. The resemblance, however, to some of the impressions on the sandstone of our coal-fields was so close, that I was disposed, without further evidence, to assign to them a vegetable origin. A more minute examination enabled me to decide the question.
The surface of these films was often shining, and the black matter, ignited with nitre, proved to be glance-coal. A more diligent search, led me to discover in the rubbish of a quarry, a large cylinder, upwards of eighteen inches in diameter, consisting of glance-coal, iron-pyrites and calcareous spar. Upon breaking the mass, it was easy to discover its woody texture, by the fibres of the pyrites, and the concentric circles of which it consisted. When fresh broken, the pyrites exhibited its usual colour; but after exposure for a few days, it changed to bronze. The calcareous spar was distributed, so as to exhibit the concentric layers of growth; and the glance-coal appeared chiefly in angular grains in the spar, and likewise in the pyrites attend to their relations and their position, it might, perhaps, be more convenient to regard them all as varieties of grey-wacke, verging to quartz on the one hand, and to slate-clay on the other. The occurrence of numerous contemporaneous veins of quartz, so characteristic of grey-wacke, gives encouragement to the adoption of such a nomenclature.
In examining vegetable petrifactions, with the view of determining, whether they are the remains of monocotyledonous or dicotyledonous plants, we must be influenced by the structure of the stem, and the arrangement of the nerves of the leaves. The first of these characters only, was here exhibited; so that, judging from the concentric layers of growth, we are disposed to refer this vegetable petrifaction to the class of dicotyledonous plants.
These specimens of vegetable petrifactions were collected, about a mile to the eastward of the city, on the Glenmire road. About five miles south from Cork, at Ballenhassig, a variety of the same rock contains bivalve shells, but too much incorporated with the rock to exhibit their peculiar characters.
The nomenclature which I have assigned to these rocks, is perhaps faulty, as being in some measure influenced by theoretical views. The striking resemblance between some of the rocks here described, and those of some of the sandstone districts of Scotland, appeared obvious to me at first sight; and had I been guided by this analogy, I would have regarded all these rocks of grey-wacke-slate as varieties of sandstone and slate-clay. 
The beds of limestone occur chiefly on the south side of the Lee. They observe the same line of bearing as the strata of grey-wacke on the north side of the river. The limestone is in general compact,—of a bluish grey colour,—of various degrees of intensity, — massive,—dull, or feebly glimmering, from an intermixture of calcareous spar,—fracture compact, even, with a slight tendency to splintery,— fragments indeterminately angular, rather sharp edged,—feebly translucent on the edges,—streak light coloured, inclining to ash grey. It is universally used for building, and is sometimes polished as a marble. In some cases, from an intermixture of tin bioxnslone, the marble is variegated.
In some varieties, especially those containing petrifactions, the fracture is granularly foliated, and the lustre glistening. Some varieties are darker in the colour, and become fine-grained in the fracture, and pass into common compact lucullitc.
The beds of limestone are of considerable extent, appearing on the surface nearly a mile in a direction across the strata. These beds are divided rather indistinctly into strata, and are with difficulty quarried.
Subordinate to this compact limestone, there occurs Common Compact Dolomite, or Magnesian Limestone; having the colour intermediate between yellowish-white and ash-grey,—the lustre glimmering inclining to glistening,—and the fracture fine granularly foliated,—it is harder than thecompact limestone.
In some cases, the dolomite appears in the common limestone in the form of a thick bed, seldom continuing to any great extent. In other places it appears as large irregular-shaped contemporaneous masses.
It is frequently full of drusy cavities, the sides of which are covered with different kinds of crystals. In this state it is usually darker coloured and more brittle.
The most common sort of crystals found here are of brown-spar, or pearl-spar, of the same colour as the surrounding rock, sometimes of a brownish orange. Super-imposed upon these may be observed crystals of dolomite-spar, in the form of oblique rhombs. These crystals are middle-sized,—occur from transparent to opaque, and in some cases are rough on the surface.
In the same cavities are found crystals of quartz intermixed with the brown-spar and the dolomite. These are either short six-sided prisms, terminated by six planes, or simply six-sided pyramids. They arc middle-sized, and adhere to the rock on one side.
In some of the larger druses, crystals of amethyst have been found of considerable size and beauty. Some of these have exceeded two inches in diameter and four inches in length. In one place, close by the marshy banks of the river, and near the town, the best crystals have been found; but in consequence of a dispute between the King and the proprietor of the soil, with respect to the right of search, all access to the cavity is prevented.
Returning again to the compact limestone, we may observe, that besides the contemporaneous masses of dolomite, it is traversed by numerous contemporaneous veins of calcareous-spar, and of massive brown-spar. Both these are pure white, while the rock in which they occur retains its usual grey colour. These veins sometimes have a brecciated aspect, containing portions of the rocks intermixed. In one place I observed snow-white fine granular limestone, in the form of a contemporaneous vein.
The calcareous spar at a place called Ballanloch, occurs in globular distinct concretions, from a few inches to several yards in diameter. Each concretion consists of numerous angular pieces, diverging from the centre, and increasing in size to the circumference. In general, each large concretion consists of a number of smaller ones. The surface of the columns is a little rough, and the angles blunt.
At the same place, there are numerous crystals of quartz, consisting of six-sided prisms, terminated by six-sided pyramids, imbedded in the limestone. These crystals are nearly opaque, dull, and the angles are blunt. They consist of concentric layers of quartz and limestone. In one of these crystals, not more than -| of an inch in thickness, I have counted nine different layers. It is obvious, that, in this case, the matter of the quartz, though in very small quantity, has been able to act upon the calcareous matter, in such a manner, as to impart its own natural arrangement, instead of thestructure peculiar to calcareous minerals.—This subject will be resumed in a subsequent part of the paper.
Not far from the city, and to the south of the Lunatic Asylum, there is a bed of Hornstone. It varies in colour; being light brownish-red, where related to the brownstone; and bluish-grey, where influenced by the limestone; the fracture is fine splintery, approaching to conchoidal, and it is translucent.
The bed is only a few feet in thickness, and preserves its direction to a considerable distance, and with great regularity. In its immediate neighbourhood, the limestone is much mixed with siliceous matter; and, in some places, appears in a state of decomposition, the calcareous portion having been, in a great measure, abstracted, and the siliceous matter left behind, in the form of a light porous mass. In this state, my acute friend Mr Davy, the Professor of Chemistry in the Royal Institution of Cork, found the specific gravity of a very porous piece, to be 2.07, and of a more compact specimen, 2.208. He has tried its effects as a material for polishing metals, and had reason to be satisfied with the results. The siliceous limestone thus decomposed, approaches the mineral termed loat-stone, transitions to which may frequently be observed in the weathered fragments of the floetz limestones.
The surface of these limestone rocks is, in many places, covered with the Lichen immersus of Withering, the shields of which, by means of some solvent, are sunk in the rock. In every crevice and quarry, the Helix rufescens and virgata, were common.
In this limestone numerous remains of the testaceous mollusca are found imbedded. Some of these exhibit very striking peculiarities of structure, and may probably characterise the formation to which they belong. I attempted to collect as many species as possible, and was kindly assisted by Mr Wright of the Cork Institution, who has formed a very instructive cabinet of these petrifactions. Many of these have been figured by Sowerby in his "Mineral Conchology," from specimens sent by Mr Wright.
Multilocular Univalves.
1. Nautilus.—One species only of this restricted genus was observed, of an oval form, the partitions distant and slightly waved.
2. Ellipsolithus,—A genus instituted by Sowerby, contains two species from this quarter. E. funatus, Sowerby, tab. 32.. and E. ovatus, Sowerby, tab. 37. This species is subject to considerable variation in shape and markings.
In my specimens, the partitions are obvious, although they could not be detected in those which Mr Sowerby possesses.
3. Orthocera.—Two species occurred in this district. The first resembles the O. striata of Sowerby, tab. 58. In the specimen he describes, thestriae are longitudinal; in the one now before me, they are transverse, and the pipe somewhat lateral. The characters of the other species are nearly obliterated.
4. Amplexus.—This is a new genus instituted by Sowerby, for the reception of the A. coralloides, tab. 72., a shell from this district, and one of a very peculiar character. At first sight, it may readily be mistaken for one of those corals which, in this country, are known by the name Fungites. Butthe chambers are distinct, although no perforation can be observed. We may add, that the history of this fossil is far from complete, and we fear that its true structure has not as yet been sufficiently explained.
Unilocular Univalves.
5. Eoomphalus.—This genus was instituted by Sowerby. It appears to be nearly related to the genus Planorbis, so far as the character depends on the shell. The E. pentangulatus, tab. 45. fig. 1, 2. is not uncommon.
Two or three specimens of other unilocular univalves occurred, but in too imperfect a state to enable any one to assign them their true genus.
Bivalves.
6. Cardium.—One singular species occurs here, nearly resembling the recent C. cardissa. It is figured by Sowerby under the name C Hibernicum.It belongs to the genus Hemicardia of Cuvier.
7. Terebratula.—The rocks of this district furnish many species of this genus, one of which, T. lateralis, is figured by Sowerby, tab. 83. fig. 1. Many of the species have the valves so strangely distorted, in comparison of the recent species, as to lead one at first sight to conclude that they had been bruised in their present repository.
8. Productus. This genus was likewise instituted by Sowerby, for the reception of several fossil-shells, formerly considered as anomiae. Some of the species found here approach near to the character of those found in the limestone of the independent coal formation. Indeed, in three species which I have compared, I could not discover any definite specific difference.
9. Plagiostoma of Sowerby.—Some of the species of this genus occur more frequently than any other. They are readily distinguished by thehinge line.
10. Spirifer of Sowerby.—The S. cuspidatus, tab. 120., occurs here. It is the Anomia euspidata of Martin, Linn. Trans, vol. iv. p. 45. tab. 3.
There is one striking character which these petrifactions exhibit, namely, their oval shape, by which they may be distinguished from the recent testacea. Neither this oval form, nor the oblique position of the valves of the terebratulae, arise from any bruise, but is quite natural, as I proved by numerous observations. All these shells arc much incorporated with the rock, and the matter of the shell is usually changed into calcareous-spar.
I observed only one zoophyte, which did not occur in great abundance. It appeared to be conicotubular,—the surface reticulated, the pores round in one variety, and lengthened in another. I could not perceive in the centre any traces of an organic structure.
III.—Clay-Slate.
The rocks of clay-slate occur to the south of the two formations, whose characters have, been given in detail, separated, however, by another extensive deposition of grey-wacke-slate and subordinate beds of limestone. The character of the rocks are well exhibited in the neighbourhood ofSpringhill, and on the north side of Ringabella Bay towards the Lee.
The prevailing colour of the clay-slate is bluishblack,— lustre feebly glistening,—fracture thin straight slaty. This is quarried and dressed as roof-slate.
About midway between Cork and Springhill, the clay-slate may be observed to include some very thick beds of talc-slate,—of an ochre-yellow colour, — glistening, somewhat pearly lustre, — straight slaty fracture,—greasy feel,—and very soft. When this slate is broken in a slightly oblique direction, the fractured surface appears splintery. In the collection of Mr Wright, I observed very perfect, rectangular parallelopepidal crystals ofiron-pyrites, in a rock of this kind, from Glandore, in the west of the county of Cork.
In some cases, this rock becomes thick slaty, dull, and the fracture inclining to earthy. Some varieties are light in the colour, being bluish-grey, inclining to smoke-grey. Others are darker in the colour, approaching raven-black. These varieties are in general harder than the common clay-slatc. Their fracture, lustre, and colour, and appearance when decomposed, reminded me of black chalk. Upon inquiry, I found that black chalk occurred. tothe south, near Kinsale, in rocks of a similar kind, and through the goodness of Mr Jennings of Cork, I had an opportunity of inspecting specimens from that quarter.
It is in the thick slaty varieties of the slate-clay, that the Wavellite of Ireland is found, and in this district, at a place called Springhill, near Fracton Abbey. The appearances which the wavellite of this place exhibit, are so minutely detailed by my friend Dr Fitton, in his "Notes on the Mineralogy of Dublin," p. 55., that few observations are here necessary. It occurs in three distinct states.
1. As a coating on the surface of the natural joints or rents of the stone. In this situation, it is diverging, radiated, translucent, nearly colourless, or with a slight tinge of green.—2. As a cement, uniting small angular pieces of the rock, and exhibiting its natural stellular, radiated appearance.—3. Inthe form of contemporaneous veins in the rock. In this last situation, it has a tendency to form spherical concretions. These are sometimes separate, sometimes united in pairs, or grouped, so as to exhibit botryoidal and reniform appearances.
These concretions are from the size of a pin's head to an inch and quarter in diameter. They consist of angular wedge-shaped spiculae, which proceed from the centre to the circumference. The surface is sometimes smooth, but generally rough with the projecting ends of the spicuhe.
The globular concretions of wavellite are sometimes homogeneous, or consist of spiculae of the same colour, extending from the centre to thesurface; other balls are composed of numerous concentric layers, distinguishable from one another, by bands of a different colour, and of different degrees of transparency.
Sometimes a small portion only of the wavellite may be observed in the concretion, the remaining part consisting of the matter of the rock, on which (unable to bestow a radiated) the wavellite has impressed a fibrous fracture.
* It appears now to be ascertained, that a certain portion of one substance, having a tendency to crystallize, is able to exert an influence over other substances contiguous, and to impress upon these its own definite forms. This is very strikingly examplified in the case of arragonite; thecrystals of calcareous sandstone from Fountainbleau, and the imperfect crystals of garnets and andalusite in the mica-slate of our own country.
The specimens sent to the Society, furnish other two very remarkable examples of the same power; the quartz influencing the calcareous matter, inthe construction of the crystals in the limestone; and the matter of the wavellite giving to the clayslate its own peculiar spherical form, and internal stellular structure.
It is probable, from these circumstances, that the crystals, which are termed Supposititious, instead of being formed in a space formerly occupied by a true crystal, are in fact true crystals, in which the crystalline substance is concealed in the quantity of foreign matter which it has fashioned.
The wavellite is likewise associated in these contemporaneous veins, with common white quartz. In one mass, which I obtained from a cottager in the neighbourhood, and which weighs upwards of nine pounds, the quartz and the wavellite occur in nearly equal proportions, indicating a simultaneous formation.
This mineral passes from nearly colourless, through greenish-white to apple-green. In one specimen, I observed it of a deep honey yellow. When exposed to the weather, it loses its lustre, and decomposes into a greyish-white powder.
In the clay-slate, petrified shells are found, belonging to the genus orthocera. These, however, are so much incorporated with the rock, that I could not obtain characteristic specimens. They abound in a quarry a little to the south and west of the town of Cove of Cork.
Viewing the characters of the rocks now enumerated in connection, I have little hesitation in referring them to the transition class. They occupy a considerable portion of the south of Ireland. In travelling from Cork to Dublin, the same rocks present themselves throughout the greater part of thejourney. Between Mitchelstown and Cashel, however, I observed numerous blocks of common red sandstone conglomerate, with which the summits of the Galtec mountains appear to be caped. But I must here stop, as I am aware the members of the Wernerian Society do not attach much value to mail-coach mineralogical observations.
I request the Society to accept of the few specimens which accompany the paper; and to receive the paper itself with indulgence, as it is merelythe outline of the subject, to have filled up which, would have required more time than I could possibly bestow.

