
THE family of Jussieu proceeded originally from the small town of Montrotier, situated in the midst of the mountains of the Lyonnais. One of the memhers of this family went to Lyons ahout the year 1680, and established himself as an apothecary. He married there, and was the father of sixteen children, three of whom, Antoine, Bernard, and Joseph de Jussieu, became three of the most distinguished botanists of the eighteenth century. The oldest of this numerous and gifted family was called Christophe, and he was the father of M. Laurent de Jussieu, who had the honour of conferring additional celebrity upon the name Ids uncles had left him, and the felicity, not less rare, of handing it down to a successor who maintains its renown. In this family a taste for botany seems, for nearly two centuries, to have been hereditary, in the same way as a mathematical genius has, for nearly the same period, characterized the family of Bernouilli.
Antoine de Jussieu, who commenced the celebrated career of the family, was a botanist almost from his infancy; at the age of fourteen, making excursions in the neighbourhood of Lyons, and throughout the surrounding provinces. At the age of eighteen he went to Montpellier, where he studied under Magnol, who introduced the term families,—a very happy expression, though at first little understood, for the affinities, and, we may say, the parentage of plants. At the age of twenty-four he succeeded to Tournefort, the greatest botanist of his own age, or, perhaps, of any other time; for he was the first to establish the fundamental principles of the science, as Linnaeus, at a later period, conferred upon it its nomenclature. Antoine being required to devote a large share of his attention to the laborious duties of the healing art, in which he excelled, did not perform for botany those distinguished services which his ready and precocious genius gave reason to expejct. He, however, called his second brother Bernard to supply his lack of service, and by this judicious step probably did more for the science, than if he had devoted the whole of his own energies to its prosecution. After having thus assisted Bernard to commence his brilliant career, he did the same kind office, and in the same way, for his younger brother Joseph, whose life was as agitated as that of his elder brother's was tranquil, and who abandoned his native land for Peru in the year 1735. He then accompanied, in the character of botanist, the scientific expedition which the Academy sent to the Equator, there to measure a degree of the meridian, and thus, by direct experiment, to settle the famous and long-debated question of the figure of the earth. Joseph Jussieu was a bright example of all that courage, and patience, and devotedness to science could accomplish; nor less so of the sad characteristic of the scientific heroism of modern times, which, in every quarter of the globe, exhibits the tombs of its most assiduous votaries. Detained at first, by the curiosity which those rich and novel regions inspired; and afterwards by the inhabitants, who, afflicted with a fatal epidemic, would not dispense with the services of so able a physician; he returned to France, after thirty-six years of most fatiguing service, broken down alike in body and mind, having even become oblivious of what he had accomplished,—thus establishing by so many trials and misfortunes, his claim to the title which Condorcet conferred on him, the Botanical Martyr. Of these three brothers, the only one who produced on botany, and, through botany, upon the whole of natural history, one of those striking influences which mark an epoch in science, was Bernard. Whilst all the other French botanists, commencing with his brother Antoine, were, with timid step, following the traces of Tournefort, he opened up a new path previously untrod, and in which no one has advanced so far as his nephew, M. Laurent de Jussieu, the subject of the present memoir.
ANTOINB-LAURENT DE JUSSIEU, the nephew and successor of Bernard, was born at Lyons on the 12th of April 1748. As soon as his elementary studies in that city were terminated, his uncle invited him to Paris, where he arrived in July 1765, in his eighteenth year. He was thus at once put under the protection of the man who, since the demise of Tournefort, swayed the sceptre of botany in France, and whose only rival in Europe was Linnaeus; he was a wonderful man, whose name is a household word throughout the scientific world, and who, notwithstanding, has scarcely written any thing. But if this eminent individual wrote little, he thought much; and spent his life in meditating upon one of those questions which comprehend almost every other in a science; he resolved the problem of arrangement in natural history, and solved this fundamental problem in the middle of an age, whose efforts of every description have prodigiously advanced the domains of human intelligence.
  At the time that the young Jussieu came to reside with Bernard in Paris, his uncle Antoine was dead, his uncle Joseph was still in Peru, and his illustrious aged relative lived almost alone. Residing in a small house in the rue des Bernardins, he went out only to mass, to the academy, and to the Jardin des Plantes; he was almost always engaged in deep meditations, and allowed them to be interrupted only—if interruption it might be called—by intercourse with a few friends, selected from the choice men of the day, such as Poivre, Lemonnier, Duhamel, Malesherbes, &c. Such was the retired life of Bernard; and to this simplicity of manners, and a taste for free and continued meditation, in which, by a peculiar trait of his character, he seemed rather to allow ideas to suggest themselves than to search for them, he conjoined a most remarkable regularity in his habits. Everything in his mansion was subjected to the most exact regularity and order, to what might be designated the very essence of arrangement. Every thing was done every day, at the same moment, and in the same way. Every meal was at a fixed and invariable hour; the supper hour was nine, and when Laurent went to the theatre, he never forgot to calculate the precise number of minutes which it would take to hurry back to the parlour, so that he might enter the one door as his uncle opened the other. We may here mention another anecdote which exhibits Bernard's character in another point of view. He was in the habit of depositing in a certain chest that portion of his revenues which was not required for his current expenses; one day he required to make an extraordinary outlay; he opened his coffer, where he found 40,000 francs. On settling this demand, the box was again shut, to be opened only after his death, when nearly the same sum was again discovered. We may here add, that he used his intellectual wealth very nearly in the same way as his secular; he allowed it to accumulate with the same regularity, and the same steady constancy, and yet with a kind of indifference, till, on one occasion, he opened it out, and traced the sketch of his Ordres Naturels, the immortal monument of his genius. After this he again left it to accumulate afresh, and at his death he transmitted it a legacy to his nephew, the most precious portion of his inheritance.
Bernard spent nearly the whole of his time in reflection, and usually in a sitting posture. The uncle and nephew worked throughout the whole day in the same apartment, and with little or no conversation. In the evening the nephew read to his uncle, who, in his turn, communicated all his own views and reflections. It will at once be perceived that the impressions received from a man of this stamp, must have exerted a powerful influence upon the character, not less than the genius, of young Jussieu; hence there was the same simplicity of habits, the same perseverance in labour, the same constancy in the development of one and the same great leading idea; never did two men appear more to be merely the continuation the one of the other—the two successive ages, or phases of one life.
  After five years thus spent with his uncle in such laborious study and intimate intercourse, Laurent took his degree in physic, and in his twenty-third year became the assistant of Lemonnier in the Chair of Botany, in the Jardin des Plantes. As soon as he commenced to discharge the duties of professor, the influence of Bernard upon his reflections must have acquired new power. He consulted him in his various difficulties, and submitted to him his doubts; though, at the same time, we ought to add, that, even in those discussions which he then originated, he was often less influenced by scientific curiosity than by filial affection. For, since the death of his brother Antoine, Bernard had become sadly melancholy, and shortly after this he lost his sight. The only links, then, which bound the venerable old man to life, were those supplied by a young man, who unceasingly watched to reanimate, by searching and difficult inquiries, a genius which was wont to be ardently bent upon meditation.
  In the year 1773, a vacancy occurred in the Academy, and Bernard urged his nephew to become a candidate for the honour; but Laurent had hitherto published nothing. It was, therefore, necessary for him to prepare some memoir, and for the subject of his first work he chose "The examination of the family of the Ranunculi." The subject selected was of no great moment, for, whatever it might have been, it supplied an occasion for manifesting his powers, and developing his enlarged ideas. Hence, it was, in fact, by a powerful reaction upon his uncle's opinions that he conceived those ideas under a new form, a form which was his own; and that he, in his turn, conferred upon them the impress of his own thoughts and of his own genius. He used often to mention that it was this memoir which made him a botanist; that the curtain was then raised,— le voile s'etait leve—was his expression; and that then, for the first time, he recognised those grand principles, the demonstration of which henceforth became the constant aim of all his efforts and researches.
This memoir produced the strongest possible impression. It introduced to notice a completely new set of ideas. After its publication, a new element,—the constituent principle of the Natural Arrangement—then received its place in science, and speedily effected a change upon its whole character. Up to this period, and particularly since the time of Linnaeus, science had very much turned upon nomenclature; but now, and in obedience to an impulse which conducted it nearer to its true object, the nature of beings, it caused the study of characters to take the place of the study of nomenclature. "Nomenclature," says the author himself, "ought not to be neglected, but the discovery of characters is the more important part of botany.'' He established the principle, that all characters are not of equal value; that there are some which are general, and some particular, some constant, and others variable, some primitive, and others secondary; sometimes a single one is of more real value than many; and hence the axiom, that we are not to count characters, but to value them.
  Characters are the indicatory signs of the relations of beings. In every organised existence, whether vegetable or animal, each part has a necessary relation to all the other parts. Consequently we may judge of them all, from any of them; and the parts which are taken for the signs of the others,— the parts by which we judge of the others, are those which are denominated characters. 
  Naturalists began by seeking for these characters—these signs—in all parts nearly indifferently; ere long, however, they recognised that these parts have nothing like the same virtue in the processes of uniting, or of distinguishing, different beings. Hence, then, arises the process of computing or calculating characters, and this calculating gives the solution to the problem of arrangement. About the middle of the sixteenth century, Gessner proposed to derive the principal characters of plants from the organs of fructification: this was the first step,—the pre-eminent importance of the seed, demonstrated by Cesalpin, was the second.
  Perhaps the most interesting problem in the whole science of vegetable physiology has been the determination of the peculiar function of each part of the flower. As every one knows, a flower it composed of many parts. In the middle is the pistil ov female organ ; around the pistil are the stamens, or the male organs; next the corolla, the more brilliant and coloured part of the flower, what is called the flower itself, by Tournefort, surrounds the stamens; and the calyx, the prolongation of the external covering of the bark, in other words, the epidermis, envelopes all these parts. A century and a half after the time of Gessner, Tournefort was still ignorant of the true use of the stamens; he actually denied this use, which was correctly assigned to them by Vaillant. The ideas of Vaillant upon the sexes of plants, which have since become popularly known by the ingenious system of Linnaeus, were confirmed by the accurate experiments of Linnaeus himself, by those of Gleditsch, and of Koelreuter, and thus the physiological problem was settled.
  It is to M. de Jussieu that we owe the solution of the problem which relates to arrangement. He noticed tbat the corolla and the calyx were wanting in a great number of plants. The pistils and the stamens again were more essential, were the producing parts of the embryo—of the new being—and were always present; but, taken separately, these organs supplied only incomplete alliances—natural alliances, and complete ones, are furnished only by the two organs taken together, and considered as regards their respective insertion. The insertion, then, of the stamens in the flower, forms the first character. The primary character of the seed is drawn from the lobes of the embryo—the new existence. These lobes are the first leaves of the new plant, the organ which supplies to it its first aliment, or at least prepares it for it. It will readily be understood, then, to use a happy expression of M. de Jussieu himself, that the remarkable and simple differences which are observed in these first organs must exert a peculiar influence upon the general development of the plant, and upon its whole organization. All the other parts of the seed, those which are strange to the new being and the parts of the seed properly so called, such as the seminal envelopes, the perisperm, &c., are only secondary portions. This memoir of M. de Jussieu, in which he laid the foundation of the science of characters, bore the date, as we have stated, of the year 1773; and this memoir opened to him the doors of the Academy.
Next year, 1774, he presented to the same learned body another paper, which was more extended and complete, and in which his leading ideas were again reviewed, somewhat differently arranged, and detailed with more clearness and precision. The occasion of this second memoir was the following :—The arrangement of Tournefort, which this great botanist himself established in the Jardin des Plantes, still prevailed there in the year 1774, in spite of all the changes which had taken place in the science; and the necessity of some alteration was very generally felt. At the same time, the numher of the species of plants, which had been acquired during this long interval, had vastly increased, and the former space was very far from being sufficient. It was under these circumstances that Buffon proposed a plan for enlargement worthy of the epoch on which his own name confers a date. He explained his project to Louis XV. who was fond of botany, and who adopted it. The garden was doubled in its dimensions; and from that time it became necessary that the whole portion which was devoted to the School properly so called, should be replanted. All that remained to be determined, was the method which was to be pursued in this new plantation. The method of Turnefort could no longer be maintained, at all events, as a whole, and more especially since the prodigious progress Linnaeus had made, first in the determination of genera, and, then, in the simplification of the nomenclature. Nor could the system of Linnaeus, in many respects so ingenious, with more satisfaction be adopted, because, in fact, it was more removed from the natural order, even than that of Tournefort. Two plans, therefore, could only be thought of, either to correct the one of these systems by the other, or to establish a new one; and this dilemma formed a barrier to any immediate progress.
The new system proposed by M. de Jussieu was a sage combination of the celebrated labours of Linnaeus, of Bernard de Jussieu, and of Tournefort. From Linnaeus he borrowed the genera, the species, and the nomenclature; from Bernard the order/!, or the natural families; and finally, from Tournefort the means of multiplying the classes of Bernard without disturbing his orders or his families. 
The genera of Linnaeus were the most precise which had hitherto been established; his species were the best determined, and his nomenclature was admirable. This nomenclature which, as it regarded every plant, reduced the long phrases of Tournefort and of Gaspard Bauhin to two words, the name of the species and the name of the genus, constituted alone, a very great reformation of the science. Nevertheless, when its introduction was proposed into the Jardin des Planles, a difficulty presented itself. The prejudice of Buffon against the technical part of the classification was notorious and serious, and at first he entered a protest against the introduction of the Linnaean names; M. de Jussieu's first task, then, was to convince the eloquent zoologist that these names constituted one of the happiest changes which had heen effected in Natural History; and he added that the Garden at Paris should not be second in any improvement whatever; and to these convincing arguments Buffon soon yielded. The Jardin des Plantes received, at one and the same time, the nomenclature of Linnaeus, and the natural orders of Bernard.
These natural orders, such as Bernard had recognised them, were comprehended in seven classes. Laurent perceived the necessity of multiplying them, and he precisely doubled their number, making fourteen. The lobes of the embryo supplied the three first: hence the famous division of the whole of the vegetable kingdom into the acotyledonous, monocotyledonous, and dicotyledonous plants; and the insertion of the stamens upon the pistil, upon the support of the pistil, upon the calyx, or upon the corolla, supplied the rest . Thus, two orders of character, the former drawn from the embryo, and the latter from the relative insertion of the different parts of the flower, supplied all the classes. Characters, of less and less importance, afforded other groups, viz. the families, the genera, and the species: the whole of the groups subordinated themselves in the arrangement, as the characters themselves did in nature; and the fundamental and constituent principle of the arrangement, derived from nature itself, is the relative importance of the characters. 
But this relative importance of characters, the basis of the whole edifice of the arrangement—how was it to be estimated in its turn—how was it to be valued with certainty? Here two methods present themselves, which are equally certain. One, which is founded upon reasoning, directly infers the importance of a character from the importance of the part which supplies it. In a vegetable, every thing contributes to the formation of the flower; every thing in the flower contributes to the formation of the embryo, or the new existence; the formation, then, of this new existence, or being, of the embryo, in short, is the aim and end of all other vegetative functions. It is, therefore, says M. de Jussieu, in the embryo that naturalists ought to look for their primary characters. 
When this method, founded upon reason, and which may therefore be designated the rational method, fails, and it very soon fails in botany, the author supplies its place by another which is purely experimental, but nevertheless equally sure, and which is, moreover, unfailing. In default of a function which is not known, or which is but little known, or which, at best, is not sufficiently known to declare the importance of the organ, he determines the importance of the organ by its constancy. Nor is this all. As it is with an organ itself, so is it with each circumstance appertaining to an organ; the most constant circumstance, in other words, the most general, is always the most important. Linnaeus made the stamens the base of his system; their number, attachment, union, proportion, and situation; he considered all, he made use of all, without perceiving that, among all these characters, one only was of importance, and because it alone was constant, namely the attachment of the stamens, or their insertion. Tournefort again founded his system upon the corolla. He regarded its presence, its absence, its situation, division, and form, and employed all these characters, which are variable, whilst he altogether overlooked the character drawn from the attachment of the corolla, the one which alone is constant. The natural order escaped the observation of these two great men, and, as we have noticed, from the same cause, because they were both ignorant of the relative importance of characters. It will, moreover, be found, if we direct attention to the progress of botanists since the time of Gessner, that all those who have succeeded in their attempts, having established some fragmentary portions of the natural order, have followed, though unknown to themselves, the principle of the importance of characters. Finally, as is generally known, there are some natural families which are as it were ready made to our hands, as the Gramineo?, the Compositce, and the Umbelliferos. In the study, then, of these families, every character which varies in one of them is made subordinate and secondary, and the primitive character, in other words, the essential one, or which may properly be called the important character, embraces the whole family.
There is, therefore, an order, a gradation, and a subordination in the characters; and the true problem is the classification of these characters in the same method that the existences themselves are, in their turn, classified ; and this brings under our notice a phase of the science which is altogether new. Bernard de Jussieu, who introduced the principle of the relative importan :e of character into the classification of plants, never sufficiently disengaged it from the details of practical botany ; but Laurent exalted it, and gave it a conspicuous place as a theory, .and by this transformation itself he generalized it, and demonstrated all its important bearings; he consummated the great revolution which his uncle commenced, and created the philosophy of arrangement.
When M. de Jussieu wrote those two memoirs on which we have been dwelling, the first germs of all that he has subsequently accomplished, both his uncle Bernard and Linnaeus were still alive. Shortly after, however, they paid the debt of nature; Bernard, in the year 1777, and Linnaeus the year after. From that time, the first place in the science was vacant, and every one perceived that M. de Jussieu was about to fill it; and of this he himself was perfectly conscious. In keeping with this remark, I find, in one of his letters written at this period, these remarkable words :—" Circumstances are ever occurring by which a man ought to profit; and an occasion of this sortt occurs in my experience, which it would be wrong to neglect. We have lost, within the period of three months, the three first botanists in Europe. M. Haller in Switzerland, Linnaeus in Sweden, and the third in Paris. There will be a glory in succeeding them, and in obtaining for France that Primacy which strangers have disputed." These words betray the opinion which he entertained of his own powers; and they were immediately exhibited in another and more important manner, namely, by the enterprise which at that time he undertook, which was nothing else than to subject the whole of the vegetable kingdom to those principles which he had propounded in his memoirs ;—an immense undertaking, whose result has been that great work upon Les Families des Plantes, from the publication of which dates the new spirit which, at the present time, animates all those who are engaged with the alliances and the classification of beings. The natural method of arrangement was the grand object to which all the efforts of naturalists had tended, previous to its discovery; and, once discovered, it has since become their polar star in every subsequent effort.
The ancients, if we except Aristotle, and Aristotle alone, did not concern themselves with the relations of beings. They made researches in natural history, and especially in botany, only on the score of utility, and studied vegetables only as they bore upon domestic economy, and upon physic. The order, the relation of species, the arrangement, which is the expression of this order and these relations,—all, in short, in botany, that was purely scientific, escaped them; and it was scarcely possible it could be otherwise, as so few plants had been brought under their cognizance. They amounted only to 500 in the days of Theophrastus, to 600 in those of Dioscorides, and to 800 in Pliny's time.
The natural order,—in other words, the true order of beings, —has its materials dispersed over the whole surface of the globe. It may be compared to an edifice, of which we have only the disjointed and overturned fragments; nay, of which we are very far from having all these, and of which we are, nevertheless, solicitous to determine the reconstruction. It will readily be understood, that the greater the deficiency of the fragments, the greater will be the difficulty of the restoration; and that this deficiency may still be so great, that our object will be unattainable; and that the only way in which we can be rigorously certain that it is perfectly accurate, would necessarily be the possession of the whole.
At the close of the middle ages, astonishing discoveries rapidly succeeded each other; and the most wonderful of all was the discovery of the New World. The curiosity of mankind, awakened by these great events, excited them to bolder and more energetic researches. The sciences were reanimated, extensive voyages were commenced, and the ascertained number of beings augmented with a rapidity which increased its own speed, and in a ratio the more worthy of remark, in proportion as it approximated to our own epoch. Not to extend, on the present occasion, heyond the limits of hotany, the total number of known plants, which, in the catalogues of the earlier authors of the 16th century, did not amount to more than 800 or 900, towards the end of the same century amounted to no less than 2000; in the following century, according to Tournefort, they had advanced to 10,000, Jn which, however, the varieties are comprehended; when reduced to individual species, properly so called, this number, according to the reckoning of Linnaeus, amounted, in his time, to 7000; it was to the extent of 20,000 in the time of M. de Jussieu, and it has quadrupled since his day, and will, accordingly, amount to the number of about 80,000, in the great work which M. De Candolle is now publishing. A single family, that of the Composite?, will contain more than 8000 species in this work; that is to say, will contain more species in a single family, than found a place in the whole vegetable kingdom in the days of Linnaeus. The genius of M. de Jussieu is nowhere more conspicuous than in that part of his History which he drew from the materials which he possessed at the epoch at which he wrote. The number of these materials has since increased fourfold, as just stated; and, notwithstanding, there is not any grand principle of the natural order, which does not find its place in his book, and scarcely any of the combinations since established by his successors, of which the germ may not be there discovered. Fontenelle admires, in Tournefort, a classification where more than 1200 new species, which, he adds, were not expected, could be introduced, and without injuring its foundations. What, then, would he have said of the arrangement of M. de Jussieu, in which nearly 50,000 species, quite unknown at the time the author wrote, have found their place, and almost everywhere, a place which was previously indicated,—a place which they were expected to fill? The work in which M. de Jussieu propounded his arrangement, the fruit of so many deeply-calculated combinations, was the result of fifteen years' unremitting labour. He commenced its impression in the year 1788, and so matured was it in his mind, that the printing was begun before the manuscript was ready; and the author was never in advance of the printer above two or three leaves. To this we may add, that the first sheets had been printed without those Notes placed at the close of the characters of the families, which are, perhaps, the most acute and profound parts of the whole book. M. de Jussieu ordered all these sheets to be destroyed, not recoiling from a resolution which would have been most distressing in a common work; he felt that his would be immortal. The impression, and consequently, the compilation, —for they advanced together,—lasted for fifteen months, and the work was published in the month of July 1789. It opens by that celebrated Introduction, in which the author anew developes, and on this occasion, in their true order, those great principles which he had already established in his two memoirs of 1773 and 1774. Here, these principles form a complete body of doctrine. A study of fifteen years could not but have imparted to it lucidity, concatenation, and strength: in it we find that the author, by his reflections, by his experience, and by his deep meditations, ascends to the very highest rules of the art of arrangement, and that he connects this art with a new science,—a science which he himself had created, —the science of characters.
Two facts predominate over every idea which relates to the natural method: the one is the very subordination of characters. By taking assistance, in turns, from reason and experience, M. de Jussieu determined, as we have seen, the importance of organs from their function; and, when this function was unknown, he determined it from their constancy; an ingenious plan, by which a fact in the valuation, which is often impossible, generally difficult, and almost always obscure, at all events, in the present state of botanical knowledge, namely, the function of an organ, is skilfully transformed into this other, namely, its constancy, a valuation which is always simple, easy, and apparent. The second fundamental fact of the natural method is, the adjustment of the characters to the groups. In the artificial methods, a character is first selected out from all the others, and the species are then submitted to this character. In the natural method, the proceeding is the very reverse; the character is submitted to the species. Systematic authors descend from classes to genera, and from genera to species ; they descend from general to particular. But M. de Jussieu completely reverses the proceeding; he ascends, as he himself has stated, from particulars to generals; and all the difference between the artificial methods and the natural method consists in this,—that the former subject the species to the genera, and the genera to the classes; the latter, on the contrary, subjects the classes to the genera, and the genera to the species; the former subjects facts to ideas, the latter ideas to facts.
  In the new department which the consideration of alliances opened up to science, every step of M. de Jussieu excited the attention of the naturalist; the secret of his power being the route he followed. The example of those families which are conspicuously and remarkably natural, constituted his guide in those which are less so. He saw in those families which, in the eyes of all botanists, are natural, such as the Graminece, the Composite, the Leguminosw, Umbelliferw, &c., that the species were grouped conformably to the ensemble of their structure; and this was a ray of light to guide his path; every character which, upon application to one of these families broke up the species, required necessarily to be excluded; and hence the first condition of every character was to respect the alliances of the species, grounded upon the totality of their structure. And this calculation of the importance of characters, deduced from their relation to the totality of their structure, is the principle upon which the work of M. de Jussieu is wholly based. The especial object of this work, is the distribution of genera into families. Tournefort had previously arranged the whole of the species into genera; Linnaeus had conferred upon these primary genera more regularity and precision; and what remained to be done was, to effect for the groups of a more elevated order,—for the groups which had even been omitted in the systems of Tournefort and Linnaeus, in a word, for the families, that which these great botanists had done for the genera.
  M. de Jussieu distributed all the genera known at the time he wrote, amounting to nearly 2000, into one hundred families. He founded each of these primitive families upon a fixed totality of characters, and he demonstrated that the concurrence of character was indispensable; for each character, taken separately, might appertain to many families; it is their combination, then, and a combination different in each, which alone is the peculiar character of each family, and so constitutes it. The character of each family, therefore, is not unique; nor is it arbitrary, as in the artificial system: this character, which is one, but collective, or a multiply is the assemblage of the characters furnished by observations, and by facts, as the most constant in each.
  It will be at once perceived, that a light so new could not be brought to bear upon all these families and principal groups of the vegetable kingdom, without the author reviewing the whole of these elements, more especially the species, the genera, and the character of each genus. Throughout this immense labour M. de Jussieu never relaxed; the quick eye of the naturalist everywhere admires that consummate experience, that happy tact, and that profound sagacity, which probably had never, previous to this time, in any branch of science whatever, been exhibited in an equal degree.
Naturalists, as already remarked, had, at a much earlier date, perceived that certain families of plants fell into a natural arrangement. As early as 1672, Morison had recognised the principal traits of the Umbelliferce. A few years later, Ray attempted a distribution of the vegetable kingdom upon a much more extensive plan; and he pointed out the great division of plants into dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous, and placed the palm in the latter group. Finally, in the year 1689, precisely a century before M. de Jussieu, Magnol published his work upon the Families des Plantes. But neither Magnol, nor Ray, nor Morison, had prosecuted these general views into detail, and, however happy, being scattered and unsupported, they came to nothing.
About the middle of the 18th century, Linnceus, to whom Botany was indebted for its nomenclature, its descriptive language, and its most precise artificial system, by far the most rigorous it ever had, published a series of Orders, or of Natural families, which amounted, in the year 1738, to sixty-four, and which he afterwards reduced to the number of fifty-eight. These two attempts, however, presented nothing more than a series of names, without any explication, development, or the slightest indication of the motives which had influenced the author, either in the formation or the classification of his families: it was, as M. de Jussieu remarked, " a kind of problem, which Linnaeus left to he solved by his successors," but which never has been solved. A more complete work, and, as it relates to Natural families, a much more important one, was that of Adanson, published in the year 1763. That feature in Adanson which strikes us as the most remarkable, is his character as a Reformer. Even in his first work, his Histoire Naturelle du Sinegal, this trait is conspicuous, in which, as it regards the classification of shell-fish, he altered it from top to bottom, and at once placed it upon its true basis, namely, upon the contained animals,—the shell-fish, of which the shells are, iu fact, only the coverings. But his original and renovating genius appeared still more conspicuously in his work upon the Families des Plantes. No man more than Adanson ever endeavoured to free the science from its systematic trammels; no one has more thoroughly demonstrated the radical fault of all artificial systems, viz. their being partial, as founded upon a single part, upon a single organ, and that organ arbitrarily selected; no one, in fine, has more distinctly perceived, that the arrangement, to be natural, or, in other words, complete, must repose upon the universality of its parts. What he failed in perceiving was the subordination of these parts to one another: and the immense influence of prepossession, even in a mind of his caliber, may be seen in the following sentence of Adanson's Report to the Academy upon M. de Jussieu's Memoir. "The principles of M. de Jussieu," says Adanson, in an unedited document preserved in our archives, "will experience opposition on the part of botanists who conceive that, for an arrangement to be natural, it must be founded upon all the parts taken together, without giving an exclusive preference to one over the rest." Adanson's mistake must here be evident to every one. What he objects to in the phrase exclusive preference, is precisely the subordination of parts; and, by rejecting the subordination of parts or of characters, he thereby also rejects that of groups, at least what is most important in these groups ; he only admits families, the number of which he extends to fifty-eight; he does not admit classes,—he perceives not, that comprehension of all the groups into one another, from the first to the last, from the species even to the kingdom, and that graduated generalization which from species ascends to genera, from genera to families, from families to classes, from classes to a kingdom, and which, under another point of view, that is to say, an abstract one, is the whole of arrangement,—this graduated generalization, we repeat, completely escaped him.
The individual from whom M. de Jussieu reaped most advantage in the compilation of his work, was his uncle Bernard; whilst it is also true that the Catalogue, like Linnaeus' table of orders, was only a series of names. The principles, however, which guided Bernard in his Catalogue, both in the formation of families, and the reduction of families into classes, have been faithfully preserved by his nephew, and they are those of which the exposition has been given above,—the subordination of the characters among themselves, and the adjustment of these characters to the groups.
  Bernard, therefore, had thus the honour of laying the foundation of the Natural Order, because he caught the principles upon which this order is founded. But, on the one hand, he confined himself to the application of these principles, without at all developing them, and probably without even eliminating the theory; and, on the other hand, even when he applied it, he restricted himself to a series of names. There is nothing in Bernard, either of that philosophy of arrangement which has discovered a new horizon for the natural sciences, or of that matured selection of characters which, differently grouped, supply whole families; and these are truly the two unchangeable claims upon which rest the merits of M. de Jussieu. No one will, we trust, suspect us of wishing to exalt the one of these celebrated men at the expense of the other. Bernard is the discoverer, and he made the first advances on the path: and if his nephew has gone farther than he did, it is because he started from that advanced position to which his uncle had led him. It is the truth only that we here seek, and this solely in the study of their thoughts, and it appears to us, that the peculiar characters of their respective geniuses may here be unravelled and distinguished by distinct traits. Bernard, by the power of an acute perception, recognised the principles of the natural order, but he discovered them without explaining them, and much more for his individual guidance than for the advantage of others. Laurent grouped them, especially when explaining them and making them familiar to others. These principles, if I may so speak, sprung up in the one, and were matured in the other; the one discovered them, the other propounded them; in a word, the one is that earlier age in which genius descried them, and the other that later age in which genius drew deductions from what had been discovered ; and there is between M. de Jussieu and his uncle,—between their labours, their methods, and the impress of their thoughts,—all the difference which exists between these two ages.
  If, after thus contrasting the work of M. de Jussieu with what had been done previous to its appearance, we compare it with what has followed, its position will remain not less singular. We have seen that the author established one hundred primitive families, and not one of these families has been suppressed, whilst more than the half of them have not undergone the slightest modification. Three of them have been carried over, and entirely, into neighbouring groups; which, however, is nothing more than a different mode of association. The majority of the others, as a natural result of the immense number of new species which have been collected within the last half century, have been necessarily subdivided and separated, but almost the whole of them precisely into those sections and groups which M. de Jussieu himself had indicated. Finally, there have been five, and five only, which have been found only partially to be natural. The errors, therefore, are connected only with some fragments of families, —with some scattered genera; and, even as it regards them, there usually occurs some note, or other indication, some query, which directs the eye towards the truth, and in a way which the most wonderful sagacity only could at the time perceive, so few were the elements which the author then had at his disposal, and so many new ones, it was necessary for him to collect for the complete and satisfactory establishment of the truth.
  If it be now inquired what is the peculiar merit attached, I may say, to every page of this work, by which it is so strikingly distinguished from all those which had previously appeared in an investigation so vast, and which had been so often undertaken, it will not be difficult to answer, that this merit consists especially in that continual precision in details, which arranges each part in its true place ;—which, not confining itself to the chief results which are rapidly perceived in every genus, neglects none of those truths, in all the orders, upon which the results are based; a merit which is altogether essential in a study in which every one of the facts is necessary,—in which one cannot be supplied by another, and in which all are nearly of equal difficulty of acquisition,—a merit of the rarest character, and which well explains the profound expression of Buffon, that patience, that is to say, constancy in great efforts, is genius.
  M. de Jussieu has been censured, and not without reason, on account of the arrangement of some of his classes being based upon the form of the corolla. This is, in truth, the vulnerable part of his Method, and he was himself perfectly conscious of it. "These classes," he remarks, "have this defect, that the allowance of some exceptions is necessary to their existence." He adds, that, viewing the arrangement with the severe glance of science, and not as a matter of convenience, it would be necessary to confine ourselves to the only invariable character, namely, the lobes of the embryo, and the insertion of the stamens. And, in proportion as the number of species has gradually increased, it has more decidedly been ascertained that this last character, taken from the insertion of the stamens, is the only one which does not vary, and which, therefore, ought not to be excluded in the formation of the character of the classes. In the same way, our continued progress leads also to the establishment of the great division, which is founded upon the lobes of the embryo. M. Desfontaines, by a singularly beautiful discovery in vegetable anatomy, has demonstrated, that the relations drawn from the organs of vegetation, in this division, every where correspond with the alliances drawn from the organs of fructification. We may even say that this striking confirmation, obtained from the structure of the stem, places the first three groups of the vegetable kingdom in quite a distinguished rank, which does not so accurately belong to the common name of class, given by M. de Jussieu alike to these three groups, and to the others which immediately succeed. These first three may indeed be compared to the four great FORMS (embraiwhetnents), vertebrata, mollusca, &c., which Baron Cuvier established in the animal kingdom, and under which are ranged, at a certain distance, the Classes properly so called; an arrangement which it will probably be expedient to adopt in both the kingdoms, and to designate by a peculiar and determinate appellation.
The question here occurs, How are we to till up the interval which separates these three primary groups of the vegetable kingdom from the simple families, without admitting between these groups and the families any thing that is arbitrary or artificial? And here, again, M. de Jussieu has the merit of having traced the method of association, frequently indicated in his work, between the several families; a character which was clearly seen, and distinctly expressed, by Mr Robert Brown. "The real problem," says this excellent botanist, " is to combine the families into more considerable and equally natural groups." And this problem has, in truth, been already solved in a certain number of cases by Mr Brown himself, and, when solved in the whole, it will yield the only valuable general classification.
When M. de Jussieu published his work, he was, without dispute, the first naturalist of his day. Nevertheless, we are not to imagine that this work had, from the commencement, all the reputation which it has subsequently acquired. It appeared in the year 1789, in the midst of that great revolution, which opened to France the portals of its new destiny, and hence it was scarcely to be expected, that a revolution in the humble science of botany would attract very peculiar attention. This work, moreover, was too much in advance of the currently received ideas, to be comprehended without long and severe study. It was, therefore, only gradually that the principles of M. de Jussieu made their way among naturalists, and more especially foreign ones.
  As soon as the new social order established in France permitted the return to quiet and peaceable studies, a circumstance occurred which suddenly communicated to these principles a new impulse, and an unlooked for influence. A young naturalist, who had hitherto been hid in a provincial town, and whose discovery, for it was one, and one which has been disputed among our contemporaries, and in which M. de Jussieu had unquestionably the honour of a share, published two memoirs, in the year 1795, the one upon " The Principles of the Classification of the Mammalia,” and the other upon "Linnceus Class of Worms? These two memoirs were to Zoology, what M. de Jussieu's first two memoirs had previously been to Botany ; they completely changed the features of the science; and from that period, in zoology, as in botany, the words natural arrangement had their full meaning, and natural arrangement was the arrangement founded upon organization. 
Cuvier bestowed, long afterwards, and upon a solemn occasion, a noble tribute upon M. de Jussieu. He distinctly declared in his Historical Report upon the progress of the Natural Sciences since the year 1789, "That the work of M. de Jussieu constituted an epoch probably as important in the sciences of observation, as the chemistry of Lavoisier did in experimental science." I am not, however, sure, that this other tribute which the Baron paid him in the first of the memoirs above alluded to, is not still more remarkable. "Zoologists," he remarked, " had no idea of that calculation of characters, of which botanists had clearly recognised the reality, and which one of them has so admirably developed in a work, of which all the other branches of natural history will speedily feel the happy influence, although it refers to one of them alone." Here we perceive the philosophic chain of advancing science is reknit by new links; and the efforts of the young Cuvier, for the renovation of zoology, are attached to the work, which had so much improved botany.
But zoology presents for the application of the natural method, and particularly for the application of the natural arrangement founded upon reason, a field much more extensive than does botany. In animals, the organs are much more distinct, the functions more marked, and, consequently, the subordination of characters more evident. The modifications of the external organs in them, in a conspicuous manner, depend upon the modifications of the internal organs ; the brain, the heart, and the lungs, for example, cannot change without the other parts, necessarily correlative to these, also changing; the reason of this strict concordance between all the modifications of the animal economy is palpable, for the principle of the subordination of organs becomes in them the very principle of the conditions of the existence of beings. But, in addition, the science of characters, by its application to zoology, has assumed a wider and more elevated bearing. Arrangement has perfected itself, by becoming more general, and by extending itself from one of the kingdoms of organized nature to another; and this by the labours of two authors, who, compared together, present very distinct traces, whereby the whole is perfected. Jussieu pursued a protracted chain of details, with unwearied patience and indefatigable sagacity. Cuvier, by rapid strides, reached the ultimate consequences, overleaping what was intermediate; it was the character of the one never to be disheartened in experimental observation, the only one, in fact, which is applicable to botany; and of the other, to seize, at a glance, the natural method, which best suits zoology; together, they supplied a new logical energy to human thought, the energy of arrangement, which, consisting in the union of objects according to their common qualities, is truly to the science of observation, what analysis, or the act of decomposing them into their distinct elements, is to the experimental sciences. And in the same way as analysis, originating from the experiments of Galileo, has gradually passed from the physical sciences into the more general science of the understanding (entendement), thereby becoming the philosophical analysis of Condillac, so the arrangement or method produced by the researches of modern naturalists, is about to produce similar effects upon the abstract study of philosophy; and it is only after this has been effected, that general philosophy,—the result, not less of the art of classifying ideas, which has hitherto been neglected,.than of the art of decomposing them, which has long been sedulously prosecuted,—will be perfected.
  M. de Jussieu published his work in the year 1789. Almost always shut up in his cabinet during years of unceasing labour, he had remained a stranger to the political movements which were then agitating the whole nation. The last sheets were scarcely terminated when he found himself appointed, in one of the departments, to the mayoralty of Paris. This mayoralty, formerly considered as but one office, was now divided, as is well known, into many departments, and that of the superintendence of the hospitals fell to M. de Jussieu. It was upon this occasion that he published his Reports upon the Hospitals of Paris,—a species of labour highly calculated to render science respectable; and in which the author had been hitherto preceded only by one member of this Academy, whose remembrance will never cease to be admired by mankind, 1 mean Bailly, alike illustrious and unfortunate. In the year 1793, the Jardin des Plantes received a new organization, and took the title of the Museum (PHistoire Naturelle. Daubenton was its first director, and M. de Jussieu succeeded him. During these difficult times, Jussieu wholly devoted himself to the administration of this superb establishment, to which were closely allied the celebrity of his name, and his family recollections.
  On the formation of the Institute, he naturally became a member. He was one of the first Presidents of the New Academy of Sciences; and he was Vice-President of the year which was distinguished by having Napoleon for President.
  In the year 1804, the chair of the Materia Medica of the Medical Faculty having become vacant by the death of Peyrilhe, Jussieu offered himself as a candidate, and all other applicants immediately retired. On becoming professor, he took, as the foundation of his lectures, the fertile principle of the agreement of the properties of plants with their botanical affinities; a principle which he had pointed out at an early period of his career; and a new application of the natural method, perhaps of all others the most proper to extend the domain of Materia Medica. In the year 1808 he was appointed a member of the Council of the University.
During the concluding half of his life, the most fixed purpose of M. de Jussieu was to bring out a new edition of his great work. Unfortunately, his bodily energies naturally diminished in proportion as the materials of the science augmented; he overtook only a small part of this magnificent work, but the fragments even exhibit an uncommon profundity which would have established the reputation of any other individual. These fragments form a series of memoirs, which, from the year 1804 to 1820, and almost uninterruptedly, were inserted in the Annates du Museum. More than a half of the author's primitive families are there reviewed; each of them is examined in detail, and in each the genera of which it is composed. In the year 1798, M. de Jussieu had not been able to avail himself of the great work of Gaertner upon Fruits. On this occasion, he made it the term of comparison, and the touchstone of all the new alliances which suggested themselves. In studying the different kinds of corn, Gaertner had thrown the light of anatomy upon that very organ from which M. de Jussieu had derived the chief foundation of his arrangement. When applied to the science of relations, the observations of M. Goertner assumed a new and unexpected importance; M. de Jussieu employed it to shed new light upon the calculation of characters, upon the formation of families, and on that art, so little known previously in botany, of applying the one to the other of those mainsprings and resources, viz. anatomy and arrangement, on which alone was, henceforward, to depend the future progress of the science.
  M. de Jussieu relaxed from his more severe labour by publishing some productions of another kind, but still having natural history, or, what expresses the same idea in different words, the Jardin des Plantes, for its object. I here allude to his Memoires sur le Museum. The Jardin Royal, originally founded under Louis XIII. by an edict of the year 1626, was at first nothing more than a garden'for medical plants. This was at the time its legal title; and its museum was nothing more than a useful drug-shop. M. de Jussieu dwells upon the insignificant commencement of this drug-shop, which has since become the most magnificent establishment devoted to the stndv of nature that is to be found in the world. He recounts the difficulties of every kind which it had at first to overcome, not forgetting the hostility it encountered from the FaculU de Medecine, who especially opposed Chemistry, the subject of one of the new chairs connected with the museum. They contended that it should not be taught in Paris for various weighty causes and considerations, and because it nas prohibited and censured by act of Parliament. M. de Jussieu also brings within our notice those illustrious men to whom this beautiful establishment chiefly owes its splendour, as Tournefort, Duverney, Bernard de Jussieu, Vicq.-d'Azyr, and Buffon. He stopped at the great epoch of Buft'on; and it is a cause of sincere regret that he did not advance to the succeeding one, which probably was in no degree inferior. In this new epoch, Haiiy, unveiling the mechanism of the formation of crystals, subjected even the phenomena of nature to the laws of calculation; M. de Jussieu subjected to laws of another character, namely, to the laws of reasoning grounded upon observation, the new existences which were accumulated from nearly every quarter of the globe with a profusion heretofore unexampled; and Cuvier, penetrating into the bowels of the earth, discovered those generations which had been long extinct. He created an art, by which he allied and united the scattered fragments of these extinct generations, and gave them, by the laws of comparative anatomy alone, a new existence, and, as it were, a new life.
Nor would I forget any of the writings which came from M. de Jussieu's pen. I find in his Thesis, published in the year 1770, the first distinct ideas upon those multiplied analogies of vegetables and animals, and upon the unity, if I may so call it, of the two organic kingdoms; views which were then nearly new, for they had been indicated previously only by Pallas; views as profound as they were new, and which have since been so brilliantly developed by Vicq-d'Azyr and by Cuvier. The only production of M. de Jussieu which might be omitted, and which perhaps ought to be, since it is foreign to the subject of natural history, is his Rapport sur le Magnetisme Animal, which was published in 1784. Nothing in this production is associated with those profound and practical questions which were the habitual subjects of the great naturalist; and consequently, we need not hesitate to avow, that nothing is here to be found which bears the impress of the firm and judicious mind of the legislator of botany.
  At the period of the Restoration, M. de Jussieu was one of the council of the University, and of the Ecole de Mtdecine. In the year 1815, the Council of the University was replaced by that of D Instruction Publique, and M. de Jussieu was not appointed to this council. In the year 1822, he was excluded from L'Ecole de Midecine, along with Vauquelin, Chaussier, Pinel, Deyeux, Genettes, &c. In 1830, when the injustice might otherwise have been repaired, most of these celebrated men were dead; and M. de Jussieu himself, now eighty-two years of age, was too old to resume his place in the faculty. In the year 1826, he resigned his chair in the museum, in favour of his son M. Adrian de Jussieu; and some years afterwards, viz. in 1831, he had the happiness of seeing his son become a member of the Academy.
Labour, throughout his whole life, had ever been a delightful and necessary exercise to M. de Jussieu; and the whole of his time not occupied by his public duties was spent in his study, meditating upon science and arranging his plants. He used even to read in the streets. He was always very nearsighted, a conformation for which his family has long been remarkable, and, when yet far from being an aged man, he entirely lost the use of one of his eyes, and, towards the close of life, his sight was so weak, that he could neither write nor examine any minute object. At this time, being no longer able to work himself, he obtained the services of those who gave him an account of the works of others; and all those delicate attentions he had so long been in the habit of rendering to his uncle Bernard after he became blind, were now repaid to himself by one who was still more dear. Problems were prepared to him which occupied his mind, constituted like Bernard's, for meditation and combination. His information was kept full to the level of the most recent discoveries; and if, among these discoveries, any thing bore upon his ideas of characters and arrangement, his botanic instinct, which was ever active, instantly seized upon it; every thing was promptly reduced to its most simple expression. M. de Jussieu then digested these new results with singular elegance in the Latin tongue; and, preparing a second edition of the Introduction of his great work, he was satisfied only when he had placed it there in its appropriate place.
There has very lately been published, in the Annates des Sciences Natureltes, a memoir by M. de Jussieu. It is his last, and the production of an old man of nearly ninety. In it we are astonished to perceive to what an advanced age the author preserves all the distinct accuracy of his mind; and still more, to find with what power he treats those ideas which were first promulgated in the year 1773, then again in 1774, and in 1789, and constantly rehandled since, till they occupied his thoughts at the latest hour. And in the midst of all this he in no degree deceived himself. He often repeated, that he thus worked only from choice and habit, and not for the instruction of others. On one occasion he very good-humouredly expressed to his secretary his reasons for writing in Latin rather than in French. First of all, said he, it occupies somewhat more of my time, and that is so muph gained; and secondly, things, which in themselves are very common-place, when expressed in a foreign tongue, assume a less vulgar physiognomy. Were I to express my ideas in my mother tongue, I should esteem them worth nothing, and covdd not work them out.
  M. de Jussieu lived personally to enjoy a large portion of his high reputation, of which he never ceased to assign the chief part to his uncle; and this modest apprehension of his own merit found utterance in an expression which I may here quote. Some one was complimenting his son in his presence for bearing so illustrious a name: Assuredly, said M. de Jussieu, the name has been of vast advantage to me.
Until his last declining years he never failed, when in Paris, to attend the meetings of the Academy; and even when he lost his sight, and afterwards his hearing too, he still continued his attendance. He delighted in the conviction, that he was among his brother associates. He was for sixty-three years a member of this learned body, and for sixty-six years a professor of the Jardin des Plantes. In the country, where, towards the end of his life, he passed a portion of the year, his principal pleasure was walking. He still sought for plants; and though he was almost blind, as just stated, yet he closely examined them till he recognised them. When his eyes completely failed he endeavoured to distinguish them by the touch, and a discovery so accomplished was regarded as a triumph, for it was a kind of problem, or an enigma, in fact, a difficulty which was overcome. This characteristic may be clearly recognised in the following words, which I borrow from one of his first memoirs, and which give utterance to sentiments which may be most appropriately introduced toward the close of this Eloge, since the author, in seeking to define, in his own manner, the qualities of a great botanist, seems to have drawn a portraiture of himself: "Any man of genius," says M. de Jussieu, "may make systems, and may vary them to infinity; but the natural order will never be the work of any other than a consummate botanist, whose patience in examining the minutest details equals his genius to deduce consequences, to draw conclusions, and, in a word, to make botany a science, not of memory and nomenclature, but a new science, which possesses its combinations and affinities like chemistry, and its problems like geometry."
The character of M. de Jussieu was developed very early in life, and he most steadily maintained it. The severe habits of Bernard had given it a precocious maturity. When still very young, M. de Jussieu received from all those who surrounded him, and many of them much his seniors, the warmest esteem, mingled with respect. Like his uncle Bernard, he was very pious and devout. Though a man of superior genius, and a philosopher of extraordinary celebrity, he knew the secret of maintaining a peaceable career; and he found this secret, chiefly, in the equanimity of his mind. He allowed himself to be attacked, in nearly all languages, without responding. He used to remark, that, if he were wrong, it was very right he should be attacked; and, if right, all attacks would prove harmless.
  M. de Jussieu was twice married, first in the year 1779, and again in 1791. He had two daughters by the former marriage, and one daughter and a son by the second, a son known to us all, M. Adrian de Jussieu, member of this Academy.
  By a remarkable contrast, in the midst of the many resemblances which he had to his uncle, M. de Jussieu loved the sweets of society, as Bernard did those of solitude. His society, it is true, was limited almost to his own family, which, however, was very numerous. Besides those already named, he had almost adopted two nephews, and a niece who subsequently became his daughter-in-law. By every member of this family M. de Jussieu was quite adored. His second wife and his eldest daughter especially, tended him with religious and affectionate care. In this all the other members participated, or, at all events, wished to participate. On his part, again, M. de Jussieu had an exhaustless affection for all his relatives. He took particular delight in gathering his grandchildren round him, in witnessing their amusements, and amusing himself with them; and he found that his library, at least, possessed this virtue, that the figures of flowers and animals with which it abounded often kept them in his company for whole hours. He loved young people greatly; and, having enjoyed the privilege of long life, he was no stranger to the drawbacks which are attached to this privilege. He lost one by one the majority of his early friends; in the same proportion new generations supplied him with others; and he died surrounded by young botanists, whose affection charmed him not less than their respect.
  M. de Jussieu became much bent down with increasing years, but naturally he was very tall. His constitution was robust. To his taste for bodily exercise; to his habits of active mental employment, and which he continued till the last; and to the assiduous care of every sort with which he was surrounded, he appeared to owe his excellent health, which was interrupted only at the close of his life, and then only by some slight indispositions. His fatal malady began with slight indisposition; but speedily, from the obstinate and entire defect of action of the digestive functions, the worst was apprehended, and he died on the 17th day of September 1836, aged 88 years, 5 months, and 5 days.
For nearly half a century, during which time his great work has been published, Jussieu's superiority has been undisputed by any one; and he saw all the botanists around him labouring in perfecting his System. Desfontaines confirmed it by his beautiful observations upon the structure of stems; Petit- Thouars also applied it with singular sagacity, as did Richard, the father of precise and detailed vegetable analysis, whose austere style is well known, and who, nevertheless, distinguishes the author of this arrangement as the first botanist of Europe; whilst all the celebrated botanists who have appeared within the last half century, have proclaimed him their master. It has been given to few individuals to exercise such an influence over other men; and to still fewer to be themselves witness of it: it is a career which is probably unique, belonging equally to the 18th and the 19th century, and which, in time as in honour, is allied with the two greatest events connected with the natural sciences in these two remarkable centuries, with the Chemistry of Lavoisier, which was published in the year 1789, the same year with M. de Jussieu's work, so closing the 18th century; and with the Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles, by George Cuvier, which signalized the commencement of the 19th century.

