
  The study of man, viewed in the light of natural history, has a peculiar importance, which no other branch of this science can pretend to. The physical characters which distinguish the human races from one another, are, perhaps, the fact of natural history, which has at all eras most struck the imagination of men. We know the great astonishment of the first Portuguese, who, in the fifteenth century, penetrating into the interior of Africa, found there men absolutely black, with curled hair, flat noses, and thick lips. This astonishment was renewed at the epoch of the discovery of the New World. Historians relate, that, on the first return of Columbus, the Europeans could not withdraw their eyes from the unknown plants and animals he had brought back, and above all from the Indians, so different from all the races of men they had hitherto seen. 
  Notwithstanding this lively interest which the physical study of man inspires, and has at all times inspired, this study is very little advanced. And first, with regard to the ancients, one can scarcely collect any thing else concerning the natural history of man, properly so called, in Herodotus, Strabo, even Galen, &c., than certain erroneous opinions about the nature and causes of the colour of the Negroes. The true founder of this new science is BuiFon. His treatise on the Varieties of the Human Species is the first important step made in this department of study. But, for want of sufficiently sure anatomical characters, BuiFon did not arrive at the precise determination of these varieties. He admitted a transition from the negro to the white; he believed that the heat of the climate was the only cause of the black colour ; and he came to this conclusion, that all the physical differences which at present distinguish the varieties of the human species have only' been, originally, the effect of external and accidental causes. 
  Camper is the first who sought precise anatomical characters. His observations on the profile of the Negro compared with that of the white, were a real advance; and Blumenbach, the venerable father of present naturalists, made a farther step, by extending to the entire conformation of the cranium and of the face this study of precise characters, which Camper had only applied to the facial line. 
  On the other hand, Malpighi, Albinus, Meckel, Cruikshank, Gautier, &c., endeavouring to determine the seat of the colour of the Negroes, opened a way which has been much more successful, although its full results have only been obtained in our own days, as we shall now shew.
Malpighi supposed that the layer of the skin, which he called the corpus or rete mucosum, was the seat of the colour of the blacks. Albinus and Meckel believed they demonstrated it; but from new anatomical researches, to which I have lately subjected the whole structure of the skin, it is evident that Malpighi, Albinus, Meckel, &c., had very confused ideas concerning the nature of the corpus mucosum. 
  In the first place, they supposed it arranged as a network; it forms, however, a continuous lamina. In the second place, they supposed it to be chiefly in the skin; it exists, in reality, only in the mucous membranes. Lastly, they supposed that this corpus mucosum, white in the white race, black in the black race, determined, by its colour alone, the colour of the men of these two races; it does no such thing.
There are in the skin of the white race three distinct lamina; or membranes—the derm, and two epiderms; and in the skin of the black race there is, besides the derm and the two epiderms of the white race, a particular apparatus, an apparatus which is altogether wanting in the man of the white race, an apparatus composed of two layers, the external of which is the seat of the pigmentum or colouring matter of the Negroes.
There is, then, in the skin of the Mack race, an apparatus which is wanting in that of the white race. The two races, the white and the black therefore, form two essentially and specifically distinct races. And these two races are not only distinct by a character of form, as the characters drawn from the conformation of the cranium and face are; they are so by a character of structure, by a special and very complicated apparatus, by an apparatus which exists in one of the two races, and is wanting in the other.
  Buffon supposes that the black colour is only the effect of climate. He supposes, that originally the Negro was white. All these suppositions fall before the better known anatomy of the skin. The effect of climate can neither give nor take away an apparatus or tissue.
The individual, indeed, of the white race, may assume that swarthy dark complexion which is the effect of hot weather; but anatomy informs us, that the seat of this swarthy complexion is the second epiderm, and not a peculiar and distinct apparatus. On the other hand, the Mulatto results from the crossing of the black and white races; and the colouring apparatus of the Negro is always found in the Mulatto. 
The white race and the black race are then, I repeat, two essentially distinct races. The same is true of the red or American race. Anatomy discovers, under the second epiderm of the individual of the red, copper-coloured, Indian, or American race (for this race is called indifferently by all these names), a pigmental apparatus which is the seat of the red or copper colour of this race, as the pigmental apparatus of the Negro is the seat of his black colour.
  M. Cuvier says of the American race, "that, although it has not yet been clearly reduced to any of the races of the Old Continent, it does not possess at once a precise and constant character, which can make a particular race of it;" and he adds, that the copper-red complexion is not a sufficient one. He would assuredly have been of a quite contrary opinion, if he had known that the copper-red tint is owing to a special determinate apparatus, an apparatus which anatomy detaches and isolates from all the other parts of the skin.
  In considering, I do not say the characters of form, but the characters, the differences of structure, there are then three specifically and primarily distinct races—the white or Caucasian race, the Negro or Ethiopian race, and the red or American race.
Such are the results which 1 have explained in my lectures of late years in the Museum. It is true that, for want of favourable opportunities, I have not yet been able to extend these researches of structure to the other races, and particularly to that which, among all others, appears most important, I mean the yellow or Mongolian. I have hitherto been reduced to characters of the second order, characters of form, viz. characters taken from the conformation of the cranium and of the face.
  I call these last characters of the second order, and by this are explained the differences which exist among naturalists regarding the determination of the human races, a determination which, in truth, has been hitherto founded only on these characters. M. Blumenbach fixes the number of these races at five—the Caucasian, the Mongolian, the Negro, the American, and the Malay. M. Cuvier reduces these five races of Blumenbach to three—the white or Caucasian, the yellow or Mongolian, and the Negro or Ethiopian, and nevertheless he confesses, that " neither the Malays nor the Americans can be clearly referred to one or other of these three races." Lastly, a more recent author, the learned M. Pritchard, raises, and always by regulating himself according to the form of the crania, the number of the human races to seven. The first four are, the Caucasian, the Mongolian, the Negro, and the American (except the Esquimaux, who form a separate tribe); the fifth is that of the Hottentots and Boschismans; the sixth that of the Papuans, or the people with curled hair of Polynesia; and the seventh that of the Alfourous and Australians. 
  As for ourselves, by adhering to the authentic crania alone .which our Museum possesses, we think we can establish ten distinct forms or types of human heads—the Caucasian type, the Mongolian, the Negro, the American, the Malay or Javanese, the Hottentot, the Boschisman, the Papuan, the Alfourou, and the Zealandic. 
  I shall recapitulate, in a few words, the principal characters of these types.
The Caucasian type is distinguished by the oval head, the height of the cranium, the prominence of the forehead, that of the nose, &c.; the Mongolian type by the lateral prominence of the cheek bones, the square form of the cranium, &c.; the Negro type by a compressed forehead, a flat nose, oblique incisor teeth, &c. ; the American type by the volume of the posterior part of the cranium, the prominence of the nose, the width of the orbits, &c. &c.
  M. Pritchard has suppressed, as we have just seen, the Malay type. This type wants indeed, even in Blumenbach who established it, precise characters. I think I have found these characters on two heads in our Museum, one of a Javanese, the other of a Madurais; two heads whose type is quite similar, and both of which are distinguished by the projection which the very large parietal protuberances make behind, and above all by the manner in which the occipital bone is abruptly flattened below these protuberances.
The cranium of the Hottentots evidently forms a particular type, beside the general type of the Negroes; this cranium is long and narrow, but it is proportionally very elevated; and by this also it is distinguished, in a marked manner, from the cranium of the Boschismans, which is, on the contrary, singularly flattened, and as it were crushed from above downward.
The Papuans, carefully described by MM. Quoy and Gaimard, and the Alfourous, described with no less care by M. Lesson, are two distinct types. The Papuans are remarkable for the flatness and the depression of the forehead and the face ; the Alfourous have a long and narrow cranium. I^add, that, if the sinking which the parietal bones on each side of the sagittal suture present, on the two heads from Van Diemen's Land, in our museum, was found constant, it would be sufficient to indicate a variety in the type of the Papuans. 
Finally, the last of the types which I propose, the Zealandic, is marked by the height and narrowness of the cranium, especially in front, by the extent of the temporal fossa, by the anterior prominence of the apophysis of the chin, &c.
  All these types are only founded on secondary characters; and, consequently, they have not the importance of the three primitive races, founded, as we have seen, on the characters of structure. It follows also, from the circumstance of the characters which constitute them being only secondary, that many of these types ought to enter as sub-races, either into one of the three primitive races already established, or into some other of those races which may hereafter be established.
However this may be, I have made use, in my lectures, of these types, provisionally admitted to refer to fixed and determinate groups, the observations which have been collected concerning different people by travelling naturalists, such as Forster, Bougainville, Peron, &c., and more recently, Lesson, Quoy, Gaimard, Garnot, &c. «
Besides, to these characters, drawn from the cranium and the face, all those other characters, the union of which constitutes their force, are to be added:—the colour of the hair, the prominence of the lips, the opening of the eyes, &c., and even the habits of those savage tribes which may be regarded as primitive, and consequently as a more immediate effect of their organization itself. I do not speak here of the characters drawn from the languages, characters of a very elevated order, but the development of which we must derive from another science.
  Our business here is to establish anatomical characters. I have proposed, therefore, in my lectures, three principal objects :—the first, to seek anatomical characters which distinguish the human races from each other; the second, to follow the modifications which these characters experience in the filiations of these races, from the primitive race to the subrace, and from the sub-race to the tribes and families derived from it; and the third, to go back to the particular laws which preside over the distribution of the particular branches of the human species on the different points of the surface of the globe.
The study of these three parts of the physical history of man, formed the subject of my lectures of late years. But I cannot finish this article, without examining a question which is at this day much controverted;—I mean, if the different races of men form a single species, or if, forming different species, they constitute what is called in natural history a genus. A simple glance at the definition of the word species will be sufficient to cause all difficulty on this point to vanish.
  Buffon defines species,—" A succession of similar individuals which reproduce each other." M. Cuvier also defines species,—" The union of individuals descended from each other or from common parents, and of those who resemble them as much as they resemble each other." Now, it is easy to see that this definition, given by Buffon and M. Cuvier, is complex, and that it unites two very distinct facts, viz. the fact of reproduction or of succession, and the fact of resemblance. 
Here the fact of the resemblance is completely subordinate to that of the succession; and Buffon and Cuvier afterwards agree in this themselves. "The comparison of the resemblance of individuals is only," says Buffon, "an accessory idea, and often independent of the first (the idea of constant succession by generation)." "The apparent differences of the races of our domestic species," says M. Cuvier, " are stronger than those of any savage species of the same genus."
Besides, the appreciation of resemblance is always more or less arbitrary. One naturalist often finds a resemblance important which another naturalist considers slight. The foundation of all natural history (for the foundation of all the natural history of organized beings is the positive determination of the species) would only repose, then, on an arbitrary appreciation.
The idea of resemblance, as Buftbn says, is only an accessory idea. It is, in other words, a subsidiary means which naturalists employ for want of the only decisive means, the fact of the succession; but when the decisive means, the fact of the succession is known, the subsidiary means ought to be excluded.
The fact of the succession, therefore, and of the constant succession, constitutes alone the unity of the species. Thus, unity, absolute unity, of the human species, and variety of its races, as a final result, is the general and certain conclusion of all the facts acquired concerning the natural history of man. 

