Part the First.—Description of the Species.
THERE are four well-marked species of this genus in the collection. Two of them appear to be identical with European species, and two are new. The former are cretaceous forms: of the latter, one is nearly allied to a cretaceous and the other to oolitic species. Not one of the specimens is in perfectly good condition, so that the certainty of the determinations may hereafter be questioned.
Shell subglobose, much-inflated, slightly umbilicated, externally smooth; the mouth suborbicular and lunate. The chambers have a slight tendency to show a sinuated outline. The siphon is a little nearer to the spire than to the back. The spaces between the chambers and the degree of inflation of the entire shell vary in different specimens. Young examples have a very smooth shell. I cannot distinguish it from the Nautilus levigatus, except in that the chambers of the French species are usually wider. M. D’Orbigny describes his shell as from the “ couches moyennes de la craie, & l’etage des craies tufau et au gr&s vert.” 
A very globose shell, as broad as long. It is distinctly umbilicated. The chambers are narrow, and the septa are slightly curved towards the umbilicus. The siphon is ventrally excentric. The mouth is lunate and narrow. The surface of the shell appears to have been smooth. Nautilus Bouchardianus, described and figured by D’Or-
bigny from the French gault, resembles the Indian species, but is not so globose, and the siphon is differently placed.
A subglobose inflated shell, distinctly umbilicated, having a wide lunate mouth and very simple chambers. The surface is transversely furrowed by numerous regular shallow sulcations, separated by acute ridges, and reticulated by less strongly marked longitudinal striations. The specimens are much injured, and the position of the siphon is not distinctly seen. I cannot distinguish between the Indian fossil and the young of Nautilus clementinus (D’Orb. Pal. Franc.; Ter. Cret. i. pi. 13 bis), as described and figured by D’Orbigny from the French gault.

This species is much-compressed, especially dorsally : the angles of the mouth project so as to give the aperture a hastate or triangular form: The surface of the only specimen is too much worn to be made out clearly. The septa are remarkably sinuous ; laterally and nearly in the centre they make a bend, the sweep of which is abruptly curved and directed towards the umbilicus so as to form a sort of triangular lobe, resembling in form a porpoise’s fin, and angulated at its superior base, whence the line crosses the back in a slightly undulated curve. It belongs to a group of forms mostly oolitic. The Nautilus sinuatus of Sowerby and Nautilus biangulatus of D’Orbigny are its nearest allies.
There are twenty-three species in the Pondicherry collection. They belong to the following sections, as established by Von Buch and D’Orbigny:—
1st, Fimbriati, a group especially characteristic of the lowest part of the cretaceous system and extending into the oolites. To this division belong Ammonites Vishnu and Ammonites Brahma.
2nd, Ligati, a group of which all the known species are cretaceous, and the greater number from the lowest beds. The Pondicherry species of this division are no fewer than eight, most of them closely allied to fossils of the beds called in France “ Lower Neocomian.”
3rd, Heterophylli, a group almost entirely confined to the lowest portion of the cretaceous system. Seven Pondicherry Ammonites belong to this division, many of them extremely near French Neocomian species.
4th, Flexuosi, a lower cretaceous group of small extent. One Indian fossil, the Ammonites Egertoin, belongs to it.	
5th, Dentati, an extensive group of lower cretaceous forms. Two of the Indian species belong to this division.
6th, Clypeiformi, lower cretaceous and oolitic. There is one Pondicherry species, Ammonites Siva.
7th, Armati, a group of upper oolitic forms. Ammonites Menu appears to belong to this section.
8th, A single Ammonite, A. Rembda, represents a type of forms as yet uncharacterized, and which I propose to call Lcevigati.

Whorls five or six, rounded, forming a concave disc, which however is not deep in the centre. Each whorl is banded at intervals by strong rounded ribs, those towards the mouth on the outermost whorl becoming fewer and more distant, and presenting the character of oral varices. There are fifteen on the outer whorl. The surface of the shell appears to have been smooth. The mouth is broadly ovato-cordate. The sutures are plainly seen on the second volution. The young shell was probably ribless.
In the specimen figured, the sutures of the chambers are visible only on the exposed portion of the second whorl. The lateral lobes are pinnate and bifurcate, and appear to have been three or four in number. Their relative arrangement is not exposed.
The cast is deeply furrowed in the region of each varicose rib, and undulated beneath the intermediate ribs.
This species approaches very nearly the Neocomian Ammonites honoratissimus of M. D’Orbigny. It differs in being less compressed ; in having more numerous transverse ribs, especially on the second whorl; and in the form of the aperture, which in the French species is oblongo-ovate.
Shell compressed; whorls six, smooth, convex, the outermost transversely sulcated and strongly ribbed at intervals ; the strong ribs six or seven in number, the intermediate ones continuous over the rounded back, but obsolete at the sides: the inner whorls with fewer sulcations, but ornamented with acute tubercles ; the umbilicus is rather deep ; the aperture is transversely reniform. Young shells have their backs smooth and all the whorls tubercled. 
The sutures of the chambers resemble those of A. Vishnu. The dorsal lobe is very large and ramified, much exceeding the superior lateral, which is bifurcated. The saddles are in pairs, three or four in number, and much-branched. The line of lobes is very oblique.
The above dimensions present the chief differences between an Indian specimen and one from Castellane (in Mr.'Pratt’s collection) nearly of the same size. The shell is suborbicular and rather tumid ; the umbilicus deep ; the whorls 5, rounded and apparently smooth. [M. D’Orbigny in a supplementary note on A. Juilleti speaks of striated specimens.] The aperture is circular.
The chambers are very much divided. The lateral lobes are two, deeply cleft and bifurcated, especially the superior one, which however is scarcely so long as the deeply divided and much-ramified dorsal. The saddles are deeply bilobed, the dorsal one, which is largest, most regularly. The divisions of the chambers in the Indian species very closely resemble those in the French species. For the present, I cannot safely separate the one from the other. The French A. Jeannoti is described by M. D’Orbigny from specimens collected near Gap, in Neocomian marls.
Shell discoid and resembling a Planorbis in shape ; remarkable for the wide concave umbilicus exposing numerous depressed whorls, usually eight or nine in number. These whorls are furrowed at intervals by deep, oblique and slightly undulated furrows of growth, about four of which are seen on the cast of the outer whorl: when the shell is present the furrows are filled up. The surface of the true shell is very finely marked by regular oblique transverse strise, the interstices of which rise into minute ridges like those seen on the epidermis of many Helices, as H. pulchellus. It appears to have been very thin. The back is rounded; the mouth is slightly reniform and very broad.
The chambers of this remarkable species are much divided, there being no fewer than five very narrow and gradually decreasing lobes, more or less trifurcated at their extremities. The intermediate saddles are also narrow and are bifurcated. The dorsal lobe is a little shorter than the superior lateral.
This carious Ammonite, one of the most interesting in the collection, appears to be an extreme form of the group of Ligati.
Whorls about five, gradually increasing, and the outer one somewhat inflated towards the aperture. The shell appears in some specimens to have been striated, and in others smooth : in the larger specimens radiating strise are seen in the umbilicus proceeding from the suture of the whorls.
The chambers are very complicated in old specimens, comparatively simple in young (as figured). The lateral lobes are four, the superior ones bifurcated, their divisions trifurcated. The dorsal lobe, which is as long or longer than the superior lateral, is deeply cleft, the branches slender and trifurcating. The saddles are more or less three-branched, their lobules ovate and very regular.

Whorls about five, suddenly increasing, but somewhat compressed, though thick. Surface apparently smooth, becoming interrupted at distant intervals by oval furrows of growth. Umbilicus very narrow but deep, especially within the second whorl. [In its ally, A. Garuda, the outer whorl rises much above the second.] Mouth not dilated, and hence presenting a suborbicular form, somewhat oblong from the compression of sides, so as to be longer than wide. [The mouth of A. Garuda is wider than long.]
Chambers very complicated. Lateral lobes 3 or 4, the superior lateral largest, much-divided, trifurcated, and exceeding in length the dorsal. Dorsal lobe deeply cleft, each division branching into antler-like ramifications. Siphonal saddle oblong. Dorsal and lateral saddles bifurcated, much-ramified, divisions narrow. The ramifications of the sutures of the chambers in this Ammonite are much more complicated than in A. Garuda of the same size.
Shell much-depressed, the last whorl gently increasing and leaving the inner whorls exposed, ornamented with ten or eleven radiating curved ribs, which commence above the inner margin, and become obsolete before they reach the back. The back is crossed by numerous sulcations, which however are not continued down the sides, but cease suddenly : there are about thirty-one of these on a specimen of the above dimensions. The umbilicus is shallow, and narrow when compared with the breadth of the shell. The mouth appears to have been ovate.
The lobes of the chambers are about three on each side, and more or less regularly trifurcated. The superior lateral is largest, and greatly exceeds the dorsal, which is wide, and terminates in two not very long spreading branches. The saddles are narrow and bifurcated. The lateral is as large as, or exceeds the dorsal. The auxiliary lobes and saddles suddenly decrease.
This species is related to Ammonites Carteroni, a French Neocomian species.

Shell discoid, the whorls ornamented with obsolete ribs on their inner sides, forming elongated tubercles immediately over the deep and steep-sided umbilicus. The whorls are five in all, the outermost broader than all the rest together. The aperture is kidney-shaped and inclined to triangular.
The chambers are complicated. The lateral lobes are three or four in number, much-divided, and more or less trifurcated. The dorsal lobe is nearly as long as the superior lateral, deeply divided, and sends out two narrow trifurcated branches which are separated by a quadrangular, oblong, siphonal saddle. The saddles are bifurcated, their branches narrow, deeply separated and much-ramified.
An abnormal form of the section Ligati, approaching nearest a group of gault and upper greensand forms of which the Ammonites peramplus of Manteli is an example.
Shell resembling in shape Planorbis corneus. The whorls are six, and exposed in the wide and shallow umbilicus. The mouth is wide in consequence of the dilatation of the outer whorl.
Chambers with many-lobed partitions. Lobes five or six, more or less trifurcated, rather short, rapidly decreasing towards the umbilicus, and placed in an oblique line. Dorsal lobe large, much pinnate and bifurcate, exceeding the superior lateral. Saddles bifurcated and more or less phylliform in their extreme divisions, equalling the lobes in dimensions, and gradually decreasing towards the umbilicus.
This species is nearly allied to the French Neocomian form, Ammonites Emerici. It differs however in the absence of distant sulcations, a character which would separate it from the group Ligati were it not so very near in all other respects several species of that section, and in the size of the dorsal lobe and number of the lateral ones ; the former being much larger in proportion to the superior lateral, and the number of the latter being fewer than in A. Emerici.

Shell resembling a flattened species of Planorbis, the outer whorl dorsally compressed so as to exhibit a slight tendency to carination ; the inner whorls exposed, 4 or 4^-, their inner margin sudden and steep. Umbilicus shallow. Chambers apparently rather simple; lobes about four, the dorsal nearly equalling the superior lateral, which appears to be trifurcated, and not so broad as the former.
Shell resembling an umbilicated Nautilus, much-dilated at the mouth, where the outer whorl becomes also somewhat elongated. Surface minutely striated, though at first glance appearing smooth and polished. The umbilicus is small; in the specimens examined it was hidden by rock. The umbilical side of the outer whorl is rounded and sloping. The sutures are beautifully complicated. The lateral lobes are four or five, gradually diminishing : they are trifurcated and much-divided, springing from very narrow bases. The superior lateral is much the largest, and slightly exceeds the very large, much-ramified and deeply bifurcated dorsal. The saddles are bifurcated, their extreme divisions more or less phylliform : the superior lateral saddle is largest. The partitions are arranged obliquely, and their sutures encroach nearly on each other.
A very distinct and beautiful species, one of the finest in its section.
Resembling A. Rouyanus in form, but compressed and not dilated at the mouth.

The surface appears to have been quite smooth. The umbilicus is very small, and not so deep as in the last species. The mouth is ovate and lunate, through the projection of the returning whorl.
The divisions of the partitions are numerous and short. The lateral lobes are seven or eight in number, trifurcated, though but slightly divided, much-dentated and separated by secondary lobes. The dorsal lobe is nearly as long as the superior lateral and broader, bifurcated, each furcation trifurcated and widely spreading. The saddles are bifurcated and their divisions are phylliform.
This Ammonite is very nearly allied to A. diphyllus, a French Neocomian species from Senez, and also to A. picturatus from the same locality, but I cannot safely identify it with either. I have compared it with specimens of A. diphyllus in the collection of Mr. Pratt.
Shell discoid, much-compressed, so that in young specimens the back has an approach to carination, the outer whorl embracing all the others so as to leave but a very small umbilicus, from which proceed strong undulating ribs, which become obsolete just before they reach the back. The back itself (rounded in adult examples) is crossed by deep regular striae, which run down the sides on and between the ribs, and become obsolete just before they reach the umbilicus. The mouth is oblong and compressed. The chambers (as seen through the shell of the largest specimen) are very complicated. The lateral lobes are five or six in number, long, slender, ramifying, and trifurcated; the superior lateral much exceeds the dorsal. The saddles are two-branched, the branches much-ramified, the ramifications terminating in ovate phylliform lobules.
A species of the same group with the last, but very distinct from any European forms. Ammonites difficilis, a French Neocomian species, figured by D’Orbigny from the Basses Alpes, is perhaps its nearest known ally.

Shell discoid and extremely compressed, the whorls rapidly increasing in breadth; the outer one embracing all the others and leaving a small umbilicus. The back is rounded and crossed by exquisitely fine regular and continuous striae, which run along the sides towards the umbilicus, but become obsolete before they reach it at the umbilicus are indications of a few short radiating furrows. Mouth oblong, and most dilated superiorly. Very young shells appear to have been smooth and much thicker in their proportions.
Chambers very complicated and elegant in their pattern. The lateral lobes four or five, very narrow and long, much-divided, and more or less irregularly trifurcated at their extremities. The superior lateral extends much beyond the dorsal, and is much wider than the next lateral. The saddles are bifurcated, narrow, and beautifully crenated. The partitions of contiguous chambers encroach upon one another.	
Very near Ammonites semistriatus, D’Orbigny, and some allied species from the Neocomian beds of Castellane.	
Shell very much worn in the only specimen in the collection, much-compressed, the sides of the whorls being almost flat, very gently increasing towards the mouth, which consequently has an oblong compressed form, distinguishing it from all the species in the collection. The outer whorl embraces all the others so as to leave but a narrow umbilicus. The chambers are not visible. This species is nearly allied to Ammonites Varuna, but easily distinguished by the peculiar form of the aperture and the equality of the whorls.

Shell discoid, compressed, the outer whorl embracing the others, so as to leave a very narrow and deep umbilicus, in which the inner whorls are seen separated by a deep suture. The surface appears to have been smooth. The aperture is oblong and inclined to become triangular; the angles are rounded off.
The chambers present four lateral lobes and as many saddles. The superior lateral is very much larger and more divided than any of the others, and extends beyond the dorsal : it is deeply trifurcated and much-denticulated. The dorsal lobe is broad and square, bifurcated at the end, the furcations tridentated and separated by a short square siphonal saddle. The saddles terminate in equal divisions, the lobules being more or less phylliform.
Shell resembling a Nautilus in form, smooth to the naked eye, but when examined with a lens seen to be minutely striated ; shining. The umbilicus is imperforate and impressed. The outer whorl embraces all the others, and gradually increases so as to form a wide, round, trumpet-like mouth. The back is beautifully rounded, and in old specimens is finely striated across.
Lobes of the sutures very numerous (seven or more), gradually diminishing towards the umbilicus. The lateral ones trifurcated and acutely pinnate. Dorsal lobe as large as the superior lateral, bifurcated, the furcations trifurcated. Intermediate pinnated but unbranched auxiliary lobes between the primary ones. Saddles bifurcated, parts nearly equal and terminating in phylliform lobules. Dorsal saddle as large as the superior lateral lobe. Siphonal inter-saddle small, linguiform.
Except in the returning whorls of the Indian species being narrower than they are in M. D’Orbigny’s figure of A. Rouyanus, I cannot distinguish between them : so prefer identifying the Indian with the French species. The latter is from Castellane.

A subcompressed shell of several rounded whorls, the outermost much the largest, and ornamented with ribs which, rising strongly from the umbilicus, become almost obsolete on the centre of the whorl, and reappear in the shape of oblong tubercles on the region of the back ; these tubercles are however altogether absent in the last chamber on the adult shell. The back itself is rounded and smooth. The .mouth is broadly ovate and subtrigonal.
The chambers are rather complicated. There are three lateral lobes, the superior one largest and trifurcated, as are also the others, but in a less degree. The superior lateral greatly exceeds the dorsal, which is short and two-branched, the branches slender and spreading. The saddles are two-branched, the lateral one being larger than the dorsal.
Shell laterally compressed, the back much depressed and bordered on each side by a row of distant, very prominent tubercles, seven on each side of the outer whorl. The foremost of these is at some distance from the mouth, and in front of it the undulations on the shell are strongest and inclined to bifurcate. There is another row of smaller and closer tubercles on the inner margin of the whorls, which forms a steep and sudden wall round the narrow umbilicus. Consequently the base of the mouth is broad, and the latter assumes an ovato-quadrate form.
The lateral lobes of the chambers are three, much divided and spreading, and more or less trifurcated. The dorsal lobe is oblong and not deeply divided, but branched at its extremity into two short trifurcating arms. It is fully as long or longer than the superior lateral. The saddles are more or less regularly bifurcated and much divided though broad (broader than the lobes). Their extreme divisions are rounded, but not foliaceous.
This very distinct Ammonite appears to be rare. It approaches some gault species, and in the form of its back resembles some French Neocomian Ammonites, but is very distinct from all.
Shell laterally compressed, the last whorl very large and suddenly increasing to the mouth, ornamented with undulated slightly raised ridges, some of which, at regular intervals, are rather larger than the rest, and rise into tubercles at the margin of the slightly depressed back. The umbilicus is deep and very narrow, and exposes four or five whorls. The chambers are not seen in the only specimen in * the collection. It approaches' very nearly to the last species (A. Cunliffei), but differs from specimens of the same size in having no strong tubercles on the whorls, especially near the umbilicus ; the general aspect is also different. It is evidently a young shell, and probably when full-grown exhibits a much squarer back, which, near the mouth, in the specimen before me, is nearly round.
Shell quoit-shaped, the inner whorls concealed, the umbilicus very small. The surface is smooth; a few fine radiating strige appearing only on the umbilicus. Back compressed and very sharp. Mouth lanceolate.
The divisions of the septa are numerous but short. The lobes gradually decrease towards the umbilicus. The dorsal lobe is largest. They are more or less irregularly bifurcated. The saddles terminate in large phylliform lobules, which are more or less symmetrically arranged, but the terminal lobule is always in advance of all the others. As the contiguous chambers encroach on each other at the sutures, great complexity is given to the pattern they describe.
Shell suborbicular, much inflated, smooth or minutely striated, the outer whorls with two series of tubercles, those most dorsal larger than the inner, which have a tendency to be prolonged superiorly into ribs. The back is slightly rounded and free from ribs, but rendered somewhat quadrate by the bordering tubercles. Anteriorly there are two deep sulcations with raised borders, crossing the shell and continuous round the outer whorl. The mouth, which is broken away, appears from the section to have been broad, lunate and somewhat quadrangular, owing to the projecting tubercles. In the young shell the dorsal series of tubercles appears to be wanting.
The chambers are extremely complicated. The lateral lobes are three, of which the superior lateral is much the largest; they are trifurcated and much pinnate. The dorsal lobe is not quite so long as the superior lateral; it is much divided at the sides and separated at the extremity by a short, square, dentated, siphonal saddle. The saddles are as much divided as the lobes and are unequally bifurcated, the furcations deeply crenate and much divided. The nearest allies of this species are oolitic, to which formation all the European species of the division belong.

A second but imperfect specimen in Mr. Cunliffe’s collection measures about three inches in diameter. The best-preserved specimen of this very remarkable Ammonite is a small one, unfortunately broken, but what remains is very perfect. The whorls are smooth, extremely compressed; the outer one sloping off’ to the keel; abruptly and perpendicularly depressed at its umbilical margin, which is also the case with the perfectly flat second whorl. The keel which encircles the back is strongest towards the mouth, and almost obsolete on the inner whorls. It is of a pentagonal form, its sides being hollowed out by two grooves. These grooves are obliquely striated, and the striae are finely punctate. On the cast the keel is rounded and the grooves are punctate only. The mouth was probably oblong and compressed. There are oblique distant sulcations on the cast indicating temporary mouths.
The chambers, so far as seen, present two large but narrow lateral lobes, which are regularly and deeply trifurcated at their extremities. The superior lateral is much the largest, and extends beyond the deeply bifurcated and wide dorsal. The saddles are uarrow and bilobed at their extremities ; they do not expand so widely as the lobes.
In the Verdachellum collection are four species of Ammonites ; of these, two (A. Buddha and A. Sugata) belong to the section Heterophylli, or perhaps to the section of which I have made A. Rembda the type, and two to the Ligati (A. Gau- dama and A. Sacya) ; the sections to which all belong indicate a cretaceous age for the beds in which they are found. 1 have named the Verdachellum Ammonites after Buddhist deities, and the greater number of the Pondicherry species after Brahminical gods. In so large a genus as Ammonites mere descriptive names become inappropriate, since no epithet of that kind can be used which may not apply to many species. Plence such an artificial nomenclature as that I have here adopted becomes not only excusable but convenient, since it indicates, without too strongly insisting on, the geographical region in which the species are found.

A fragment of a very beautiful finely-polished Ammonite, the whorls of which appear to have been ornamented with radiating, rather undulating sulcations, separating broad, smooth, rounded ribs which run over the rounded back. The surface is very smooth, but bears traces of minute striee. It is closely allied to the Columbian Ammonites Dumasianus, described and figured by M. D’Orbigny in his ‘ Geology of South America.’
A Nautilus-like shell, compressed at the sides, rounded at the back, but bearing an obtuse narrow siphoniferous keel. The surface is smooth ; the centre is umbilicated ; the mouth is oblong and lunate.
A Planorbis-like species, with thick round-backed whorls, so coiled as to exhibit a broad and concave umbilicus. The surface of the shell is minutely striated across. The last whorl is crossed at distant intervals by obscure ribs marking periods of growth. The chambers are not visible.
A fragment of a very distinct Ammonite, allied to A. Mayorianus of D’Orbigny, having flat coiled whorls, which are semi-sulcated ; the furrows run across the rounded back. Several varices of growth cross the outer whorl at irregular distances.

Besides the above-described Ammonites from Pondicherry, there is a fragment (represented in PI. VII. fig. 9) which at first sight seemed to be a portion of some Scaphite, but which I now believe to be a part of the outer whorl of an Ammonite allied to some characteristic oolitic forms (A. Gowerianus for example).
The whorl is very narrow, and has aback much wider than its breadth. The sides are ornamented with fine deep simple ribs, narrower than the furrows between them. Some of these ribs proceed without increasing over the back and round to the other side ; others, in the example before us, meet in threes at short but prominent
tubercles which are placed at considerable distances from each other along the side of the back. From the dorsal side of each of these tubercles, three or four similar fine ribs spring and run across the back to the opposite tubercle.
Of this characteristic cretaceous genus, there are two species in the Pondicherry collection, both distinct from all forms hitherto described.
Shell a long scabbard-like sheath, broad at the mouth and gradually tapering; compressed at the sides, especially dorsally. The back is very narrow and flat, margined along two-thirds of the shell by two very slightly-undulated, obtuse, narrow ridges ; from these, for about a third of the breadth, the sides are smooth, or marked only by oblique lines of growth, but in the centre they are undulated by oblique tubercles, which become less numerous and obsolete as the shell becomes narrower. These tubercles are continued slightly to the margin of the broad flat
ventral surface. The mouth is very oblique, being produced dorsally into a linguiform process. The upper surface of each of the lateral tubercles is often marked by a little group of groove-like striae. The cast is very smooth and its angles very obtuse.

The chambers are beautifully marked. There are five lobes and five saddles, all symmetrical. The dorsal lobe is very wide, and its two crenated branches are separated far apart by a wide siphonal saddle. The superior lateral lobe is longer than the dorsal, but not so broad ; the inferior laterals are wider than the superior, but not so long. The lateral saddle is longer and broader than the dorsal; the saddles are elegantly, though not deeply, crenate, and the lobes similarly dentate. The ventral lobule is very short, ovate, crenate and unsymmetrical at its extremity.
Locality, Pondicherry. Apparently abundant. Nearly allied to Baculites incurvatus of Dujardin, and to the Baculites anceps of Lamarck. The form and the more transverse tubercles distinguish it from the former ; the tubercles and the conformation of the chambers from the latter.
Shell completely cylindrical, gently tapering, marked with obsolete regular longitudinal striae, which are not always clearly visible, and obscure undulating oblique transverse folds. The chambers are not visible in the specimens examined. This remarkable and very distinct Baculite appears to be the analogue of the B. neocomiensis of D’Orbigny.	
To this genus probably belongs a Planorbis-like cast of four contiguous whorls, which are convex, rounded, and obscurely undulated : the aperture is round. I have named it provisionally Turrilites planorbis. It measures an inch across, and the last whorl is an inch thick. Genus Hamites, Parkinson.

Shell presenting an elliptical section, compressed at the sides, ornamented with encircling ribs which are very regular, and separated by shallow furrows, each of which is about three times the breadth of a rib. At intervals they are interrupted by deep and broad sulcations, indicating stages of growth. The sutures show that the chambers were of no great dimensions, though separated by complicated partitions. Both lobes and saddles are bifurcated and even. The pinnations of the lobes are not deep, hence their margins are but slightly denticulated and the interspaces broad.
Shell ornamented with very fine and closely-ranged thread-like ribs, which run obliquely though regularly, and are slightly rounded at their summits. In some of the specimens they are interrupted at distant intervals by varices and furrows, indicating arrests of growth. The interstices are narrow, shallow and smooth. All the specimens are more or less curved, some very slightly, others suddenly. The posterior extremity terminates in an obliquely-coiled helicoid spire. The sutures of the chambers are well seen in one of the most curved examples. From it we know the chambers to have been distant, and the partitions divided into evenly furcated lobes and saddles. The largest saddle is the superior lateral; the pinnations of the lobes are not deep, but the larger divisions are wide-spreading. On the whole, the sutures are more complex than in the last species.

The surface of this Hamite is barred by very regular sharp ribs, which in some specimens are arranged more or less obliquely. The sulcations between the ribs are quite smooth and rounded. The section of the shell is round, or very slightly compressed. Most of the fragments are straight, but a few are segments of a considerable curve, which shows that the termination posteriorly was spiral. The largest and most curved specimen bears two oral varices. The sutures are seen on some small fragments ; they are composed of six lobes and six saddles, both
lobes and saddles bifurcated, and not very deeply pinnate. The superior lateral lobe is larger than the dorsal.
This species, which grows to a great size, is encircled by very numerous, prominent and closely-placed ribs. The posterior extremity becomes suddenly spiral, so as to form, when young, a species of the genus Helicoceras of M. D’Orbigny. The spire is of three oblique turns, placed quite apart from each other. The partitions of the chambers are very complicated, the lobes and saddles being narrow and much pinnated. They are doubly bifurcated and even.

Of a species of this interesting and curious genus, established by M. A. D’Orbigny, there are numerous fragments, beautifully preserved, in the Pondicherry collections. The known European species of Ptychoceras are from the lowest beds of the Cretaceous system.
The shell is round, straight for the greater part of its length, and tapers posteriorly ; at its widest part it makes a sudden crook-like curve to form the aperture. This portion is more frequently plicated, and the plications stronger than at the straight portion; posteriorly it seems to have made a similar sudden curve ; in the younger specimens, indeed, so sudden, that the two parts of the crook are touching. The bend below is striated transversely. The nature of the final termination has not been seen.
The chambers present six lobes and six saddles comparatively (with Hamites) very simple, and not differing very greatly in size. The dorsal and ventral lobes are largest. The dorsal, as well as the laterals (which are equal), are bifurcated, each furcation slightly bidentate ; the ventral is trifurcate. The saddles are broader than the lobes, and composed of two nearly equal, broad, emarginate (bi-lobuled) branches.

In the following descriptions of the fossil gasteropodous mollusca of Southern India, I have described under each genus all the species of cretaceous age belonging to it in the collection, whether from Pondicherry, Trinchinopoly, or Verdachellum. It will be seen that all the species are new, as might indeed have been expected in this group. The allies of many are to be found among European cretaceous fossils, but others are, if anything, more nearly allied to tertiary and recent forms. Several belong to genera hitherto considered of very recent creation. The interpretation of these very remarkable peculiarities will be found in the second part of this report.
The genera are arranged in what I consider the sequence of their alliance. The arrangement differs considerably from that which is usually adopted. I commence with Trochus and its allies (Pleurotomaria ? Nerita and Phasianella), because, among all the genera to be passed in review, these are, in many respects, most highly organized. In them we find indications of a higher organisation, exhibited in the characters of the eyes, tentacula, and appendages of head and body. Natica will be found far removed from its usual but incorrect association with Nerita; its true position, as is evident to any one who studies and understands the animal, being close to Bulla, where also Tornatella must be placed, its animal being still more similar to that of the last-mentioned genus.
A conical flat-whorled shell, resembling some varieties of Trochus cinereus in shape. The whorls are five, and are ornamented by a few spiral thread-like ribs with obliquely striated interstices. The strise run over them, and slightly crenulate the ribs. The base is flat, spirally grooved and ornamented like the upper portion of the basal whorl. There appears to have been an umbilicus, possibly with a crenated margin like a Solarium. The mouth is oblique and quadrangular. The cast is smooth.
A very pretty little species, resembling the recent Trochus Adansoni in general aspect. The whorls are tumid and slightly flattened at their summits, where they are ornamented by rather distant, oblique, deep radiating striae ; these are continuous with fine lines of growth, which run across the apparently smooth sides, and on the basal whorl meet and again become deep around the umbilicus. The aperture is slightly angulated.
A conical Cirrus-like species, presenting very distinct characters. The whorls are ventricose and slightly angulated. The shell is ornamented with oblique distant folds crossed by spiral sulcations. The base appears to have been slightly perforated; the aperture is quadrangular. The crest is quite smooth and slightly undulated beneath the folds. In the specimen preserved very little of the shell remains.
A much-depressed Rotella-like shell, but having a deep and well-marked umbilicus. Above it is lenticular, and the suture very shallow: beneath it is slightly convex. The entire shell appears to have been spirally grooved. The only specimen is not in good state. It is, however, easily distinguished from any of its allies.

A pyramidal shell, with nearly flat whorls, spirally striated. The spiral sulca- tions are usually arranged in pairs between two broader thread-like ridges, of which there are about four on each side of the median furrow. The ridges on the summits of the whorls near the suture are strongest. The base appears to have been umbilicated, but the umbilicus is obscured by rock in the only specimen brought home.
In general form and details of sculpture this species approaches the Pleurotomaria gigantea of the English lower greensand, and still more nearly the Pleurotomaria Pailletiana of the neocomian beds of France.
A conical but slightly depressed shell, with convex whorls, which are almost carinated in the centre. They are spirally striated with rather distant striae on each side of the narrow mesial’furrow. The base is bounded by a thickened margin. Transverse oblique wrinkles run across the whorls from either edge, and meet, forming an angle at the mesial furrow.
It is allied to several French species from the Craie chloritee.
Shell thick, subglobose, transversely ovate, with three volutions, those of the spire minute. The last whorl sculptured in a remarkable manner, its uppermost part being ornamented with deep-waved sulcations, which are succeeded in the centre of the whorl by obscure granulations, whilst the lower portion is spirally grooved, the grooves becoming obscure. 
An ovate smooth shell, with a very small and low spire. The whorls are carinated near the suture by a fold which runs along the spire like a little wall. The space between this fold and the suture is flat, not excavated. The characters of the pillar-lip are concealed by rock. It is a very distinct species, and cannot be compared with any fossil with which I am acquainted.
A smooth egg-shaped shell with a very obtuse spire, the distinction between the whorls marked only by the suture. The characters of the pillar-lip are concealed by rock. It is as distinct from described fossil forms as the last species.
This beautiful and curious little Nerita resembles remarkably some of the varieties of the living Littorina neritoicles. It is ovato-globose, with a very small and obtuse spire of three whorls, indicated only by the deeply impressed suture. To the eye the surface is smooth, but the lens shows a double striation, consisting of—1st, well-marked regular equidistant lines of growth, and, 2nd, very minute radiating strice, as if the remains of a glistening epidermis. The mouth is lunate, and truncated by the thickened pillar-lip. Its nearest ally is the species last described.

I have applied this name provisionally to a fine fossil shell, from Pondicherry, exhibiting a spire of five gradually decreasing, slightly convex whorls, and a large ventricose, ovate body-whorl. It is smooth, and resembles Achatina Zebra in form. The mouth is unfortunately partly concealed and partly broken, but I have little doubt that better specimens will show it to be a Phasianella. The specimen figured measured 2 inches in length and across the body-whorl.
Transverse diameter of lowest whorl 1t3q inch. Height 6 inch. The largest specimen must have been nearly 5 inches long when entire.
A strong shell, resembling a Nerinsea. The whorls are very flat and concave in the centre, where from four to five thread-like ribs encircle them spirally: the lowermost of these threads is most prominent. The whorls are divided from each other by a very deep suture, which is margined by the thickened and irregular crenated upper margin of the continuous whorl. The base is flat and keeled, and the aperture is quadrangular.
Shell moderately elongated, tapering, with rather ventricose whorls divided by a deep suture. There is a considerable space between the uppermost transverse ridge of one whorl and the lowermost of another. Of two specimens examined, one had eleven whorls; the other was a fragment of a much larger example.
It is distantly related to the Turritella granulata of the Blackdown greensand.

A ventricose shell of few whorls (in one instance seven), the last comparatively much the largest. They are banded by distant regular spiral ribs, the uppermost of which is distant from the suture. The mouth is slightly angulated at the base.
A tapering shell, with nine whorls, which are flat in the centre, and suddenly and angularly sloped off towards the deep suture. Three filiform ridges wind round the volutions, two forming the edges of the flattened space, and the third occupying its centre. The base is rather convex, and the mouth nearly round. The species is gregarious.
A short conical species, having seven ventricose whorls, which are crossed by fifteen rather slender, equal, elevated, continuous ribs, closely packed on the upper whorls. The base is carinated centrally by a spiral rib, below which the longitudinal ribs become less marked. The mouth is slightly angulated by the projection of the basal rib. The interspaces of the ribs are striated. The great breadth of the lowest whorl gives a very conical and distinct form to this shell. There are two specimens in the collection, both from Pondicherry. No recorded cretaceous Scalaria resembles it.
To this genus in all probability belongs the fragment of an uncoiled spiral, consisting of two loose turns of angulated rugose whorls spirally striated and semiplicated.


