Spokes are aquatic productions; and as the three known Species of fresh-water sponge, the Spongilla pulvinata, SpongillaJriabills, and Spongilla ramosa, are now excluded from the genus Spongia by the best authorities, Lamarck, LamoUroux, andCuvier, all the known species of true sponge are inhabitants of the ocean.
Sponges have a very wide geographical distribution. They have been met with on the coasts of Norway, New Holland, North America, Otaheite, and most of the intervening shores. Fabricius found several species on the shores of Greenland, and nearly an hundred species were brought by Peron from Australasia; so that this genus has a known distribution over nearly 90 degrees of latitude, and within this range they are known to abound on the shores of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.
Their growth and distribution, like those of other animals, are influenced by climate. They arrive at greatest perfection within the tropics, and become smaller, more rare, and of a firmer texture,, as we approach the polar circles. Those most valued in the arts, the Spongia communis, Spongialacinuhsa, and Spongia usitatissima, are inhabitants of the coasts of America, the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean. The small Spongia compressa and the Spongia ciliata thrive on the frozen shores of Greenland, beyond the 60th degree of north latitude.
It is not known under what pressure of the ocean these delicate creatures may live, but they are found equally in places covered perpetually by the sea, as in those which it leaves dry at every recess of the tide. They adhere to and spread over the surface of rocks, Thalassiophytes, and marine animals, and are so firmly attached to them, that they cannot be removed without lacerating or injuring their bodies. Although they thrive best in the sheltered cavities of rocks, they come to maturity in situations exposed to the unbroken fury of the surge; but, in the latter situations, I have always observed them smaller and firmer in their texture like those inhabiting colder climates, whether their exposure were to the north or south. They cover the nakedness of cliffs and boulders, they line with a variegated and downy fleece the walls of submarine caves, or hang in living stalactites from the roofs.
They attach themselves indiscriminately to bodies belonging to the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, and the individual species seem to have no law with regard to the particular substances to which they adhere. I have found sponges adhering to basalt, greenstone, sandstone, soft slate-clay, various kinds of fuci, shells of living and of dead mollusca, shells of living crustaceous animals, Sertidarice, Flustrte, Corallines, and even to the soft surface of living compound Ascidias; but I have not seen thein on clay, sand, gravel, bituminous shale, decayed wood, nor any metallic body, though favourably placed to receive them.
The branched species I have always found hanging perpendicularly from the under and sheltered surface of solid overhanging cliffs, or tabular masses of rock. The flat spreading species with projecting papilla, I have generally found on the »ides of boulders; while the flat species, without prominent papillae, are generally seen on the under-surface of rocks, or enveloping bodies which admit of a little motion by the agitation of the sea. The delicate and beautiful Spongia compresses I have found hanging from the surface of Ascidia, or of flat sponges, which covered the under-surface of rocks: they hang either single or attached in groups, and are likewise seen attached to the rock itself. The Spongia coalita is a branched species, capable of rising erect, from the great breadth of its base, the firmness of its skeleton, and the frequent anastomoses of its branches.
The known range of magnitude of the sponge is perhaps greater than that of any other animal; indeed, it is one of the most irregular of organized beings in magnitude, form, and colour. The Spongia: compresses of the Frith of Forth some times do not exceed half an inch when full grown, while the splendid Spongice crateriformes of tropical seas, are known to acquire a magnitude of nearly four feet. And probably sponges acquire a much greater size when they spread over the sheltered surface of cliffs in the warmer parts of the ocean. The flat spreading species of the Frith of Forth acquire a much greater size than any of the branched kinds.
The forms which this animal assumes are very various, and that of the spreading flat species depends much on the surface to -which they adhere. They are found sessile, pedunculated, flabelliform, infundibuliform, tubular, foliaceous and branched. From these seven general varieties of form, they have been divided by Lamarck into seven groups, each of which contains many species, again characterised by particular forms, subordinate to the general form of the group. The colours are likewise employed to discriminate the species; but as they entirely change by drying, they afford less useful characters. The most frequent colours are brown and yellow, though sponges are likewise met with grey, green, and white; even red and black species (Spongia rubra and Spongia nigra) are found near Suez in the Red Sea. The odours of some sponges are decidedly animal, while others belong to common and well-known vegetables. The Spongia coalita, when newly taken from the water, smells very strongly of the common mussel,and when burnt, it still resembles the same bivalve burnt; the Spongia compressa, on the other hand, smells strongly of the common mushroom; some, as the Spongia oculata, have scarcely a perceptible odour. . .
In their natural state, they are soft and elastic, and possess lively colours; but many of the species, by drying, become quite friable, lose their fine shades of colour, and become white. Soon after death, they pass through a bluish colour to black, by putrefaction. The whole body of a sponge is specifically heavier than sea-water; and each of its parts taken separately sinks in that element.
From the softness and permanent elasticity of the fibres of many species, both in the moist and dry state, this animal is employed in the arts, and in domestic economy, where its place could not be supplied by any other known substance. Books have been written in the German and English languages by Zeller and White, on the uses of sponge in surgical operations. The fibres contain muriate and carbonate of soda, iodine, and, like Thalassiophytes, carbonaceous matter. From their iodine, they have been much and successfully employed in the treatment of bronchocele, and in the removal of chronic enlargements of the glands, in the mountainous districts of the Continent. In the British dominions, the Spongia officinalis (Sponga lacinulosa, Lamarck,) is recommended as an article of Materia Medica by the Colleges of Physicians of London, Dublin and Edinburgh. Sponges form a valuable article of commerce in the East, and some islands of the Mediterranean export no other article of trade.
The species of this animal were studied,—their characters were described,—their phenomena in the living state were observed,—and their uses in the arts were known, by the Greeks more than 52000 years ago. It is pleasing to observe, that our forefathers, at such a remote period, were occupied, like ourselves, among the rocks of the sea-shore, experimenting on this humble and apparently insignificant being; and, if we possessed entire the writings of the naturalists of that period, particularly of those alluded to by Aristotle on the shores of the Toronian Gulf, there would, probably, be nothing new in the details of the following inquiry. Aristotle gives an account, in his usual brief manner, of the theories which had prevailed among naturalists before his time, concerning the vitality of the sponge; and .mentions the arguments which had been used to prove that this animal is sensitive. It was asserted by some, that the sponge contracted itself, when an attempt was made to tear it from the rock; and that it embraced more firmly the rock to which it was attached, when the winds blew violently upon it, or the waves dashed against it. But he does not state this as his own opinion; and he even mentions, that the naturalists of Toroi doubted the truth of these facts. He gives an account of different kinds of small animals found in the cavities of sponges some resembling the larvae of moths, or other winged insects others resembling earth-worms. He particularly describe Pinnopholaces (Pinnotheres of Latreille) infesting the cavities of sponges; and says, that they open their mouths, to allow small animalcules to enter, and shut them in, to destroy them when caught. These different animals, however, he states, merely shelter themselves, and are nourished in the cavities of the sponge; they become the prey of small fishes when the sponge is torn from its seat; and even the broken remains of the sponge are consumed by the same fishes. But he mentions, that the remains of a sponge thus torn from its place may continue to grow upon the rock, and become a complete sponge; that sponges, in deep and sheltered situations, have a softer texture than in places exposed to the winds and tempests, which check their growth and render them harder; and that they grow best near the shore, in situations, however, where they may be completely covered at high-water, because they are thus washed and cooled by every access of the tide. He speaks strongly of the injurious effects of high temperature on these animals; and says, that it causes them to run rapidly into putrefaction. This remark of Aristotle I have found of service, in keeping sponges alive for the following experiments. The species found on the coast of Lycia, he states, were of great magnitude, but of a rare and loose texture. He gives a description of three different species of this animal, which he characterizes by the looseness or compactness of their texture. Those which are compact, he says, are generally softest; and he mentions, that the helmets and sandals of the Grecian warriors were lined with a strong compact kind of sponge. From an expression which he uses, he even insinuates, that the helmet of Achilles, the hero of the Iliad and of the Trojan war, was lined with the same substance: thus giving the employment of this extraordinary animal in the arts an antiquity of 3000 years.
From such a remote origin of the study of this animal, its natural history is now greatly advanced; for we are at present acquainted with nearly as many species of the sponge as of any other animal in the creation. Independent of the subordinate varieties under each species, which amount often to three, sometimes even to four, as in the Spongiapala of Lamouroux, Linnasus has described 14 distinct species; Pallas 27, Gmelin 45, Lamarck 138,and Lamouroux 163 species of marine sponge. Guettard even divided the species into seven great genera; Eponge, Mane, Tragc, Pktceau, Agacc,Tongue and Linze; he ransacked die ancient strata of the earth in search of antediluvian species, and has described many fossil sponges, which before had been mistaken for fruits or accidental mineral formations. But the philosophy of the sponge, the immutable foundations on which scientific discriminations of the species ought to rest, the minute investigation of the mechanism, the composition, and the uses of all the parts of this animal, and of the extraordinary phenomena it exhibits in the living state,—its mode of growth,—its kind of food,—its habits and diseases,—the means of cultivating an animal, which has so long rendered important services to mankind,—its mode of propagating the species, and extending them over the globe, and the great purposes which it is destined to fulfil in the universe, have remained where Aristotle left them; or rather, in this branch of the study, mankind have gone backward ever since his time: For Pliny, who wrote 400 years after him, conceived, that male and female organs of generation were placed separately on different sponges, although it had been known to the earliest naturalist, that this animal remains immoveably attached to one spot through life, without locomotive power in any of its parts. So late as the year 1752, Peyssonell communicated tothe Royal Society of London, as the result of his extensive researches on the splendid marine sponges of the coasts of America, a detailed account of the formation of these substances, by numerous small worms found in their cavities. He says, that these worms construct the sponge like a bee-hive, for the purpose of protection and nourishment; and even that the same kind of worms construct different species of sponge. If the plates which accompanied the writings of Aristode, and to which he sometimes refers by signs in his description of parts, should hereafter be discovered among the ruins of antiquity, we will there find represented as occasional inhabitants of the sponge, the same worms which Peyssonell, 2000 years after him, mistook for the fabricators of that substance. We now know, that the Nereis alluded to by Peyssonell, infests almost every other soft zoophyte as well as the sponge.
The celebrated Lamouroux, the latest, the most useful, and the most scientific writer on these animals, considers sponges as living masses, without organization, or apparent motion, without a mouth, or organs, or any thing, in fact, which we observe in other animals, and says that this hypothesis is less problematical than any other, and is supported by observations made by him on the sponges of the coast of Calvados in Spain. This statement, from the present illustrious Professor of Natural History at Caen, and author of the most complete and valuable work on zoophytes that has yet appeared, and statements as erroneous concerning the marine sponge from Lamarck, Cuvier, and other eminent modern naturalists, have induced me to push the inquiry to some length, with regard to a very few species; and, though these observations have been made in the depth of winter, and only on the small sponges of the Frith of Forth, they have enabled me to correct some mistakes, and to suggest some new views regarding these animals, which may be useful to those who are interested in such inquiries.
Marsigli, after much research into the nature of marine plants and zoophytes, was convinced that the sponge is a vegetable, and is nourished like Thalassiophytes, by absorbing water through the holes on its surface; and, notwithstanding that he entertained such an opinion of its nature, he was the first who declared, in 1711, that he saw a systole and diastole of certain round holes on its surface. This extraordinary and inconsistent statement, made, for the first time, after this marine production had been studied for upwards of two thousand years, soon spread, with the fame and writings of its author, through Europe, and was well known to our countryman Ellis, before he began to investigate the nature of the sponge. The statement which Ellis communicated to the Royal Society of London, in 1765, is a memorable example of the influence of imagination over our very perceptions. This great zoophytist, having his mind already prepossessed by the assertion of the Italian naturalist, placed living portions of the Spongia urens and Spongia cristata in glasses of sea-water, when on the coast of Sussex, and declares that he not only saw the contractions and dilatations of the apertures mentioned by Marsigli, but likewise saw the water pass to and fro through the same apertures on the surface. Pallas immediately copied this hasty assertion from the Transactions of the Royal Society, into his Elenchus Zoophytorum, which he published the following year. Other naturalists followed so great an example, and thus was established and propagated an important error, which has pervaded the works of zoologists for half a century, and greatly retarded the progress of this interesting branch of comparative anatomy.
Before examining the structure of the sponge, I had frequently seen, with the assistance of a microscope, the currents established in sea-water, by the rapid vibration of the ciliated tentacula of many Polypi, particularly of the Sertularia and Akyonia, and likewise by the ciliated circular margins of such as possessed no tentacula. And, as every writer since the time of Marsigli agreed in considering the round apertures on the surface of the sponge as the passages through which nourishment is conveyed to the animal, I naturally began by a careful examination of these canals, in a variety of sponges. But, instead of finding any ciliated margins, or distinct polypi, within these large tubes, or any apparatus sufficient to create a current into them, I found them, particularly in the Spongia panicea, where they are wide and distinct, lined throughout their whole winding and an astomosing course, with a smooth, soft, glistening membrane. This transparent colourless membrane was very evident at the angles of separation between the branches of the internal canals; for at these places few of the horny fibres shot into it, and it could there be raised by the point of a needle; but, throughout the rest of the tube, it appeared stretched from fibre to fibre, and so firmly connected with the axis or skeleton of the animal, that it could not possibly contract so as to empty the whole of the internal canals, without a general contraction of the entire sponge. But as I knew already that the animal never contracted its body, nor could be forced to do so by the strongest irritants, I found it impossible to explain the power of suction ascribed to these canals by any theory; and, in this dilemma, I had recourse to the microscope, well assured, that if currents really passed to and fro through the round apertures, they might be seen by the same means which had so often detected the currents of much smaller zoophytes.
In the month of November last, I therefore put a small branch of the Spongia coalita, with some sea-water, into a watch glass, under the microscope, and, on reflecting the light of a candle up through the fluid, I soon perceived that there was some intestine motion in the opaque particles floating through the water. On moving the watch-glass, so as to bring one of the apertures on the side of the sponge fully into view, I beheld, for the first time, the splendid spectacle of this living fountain vomiting forth, from a circular cavity, an impetuous torrent of liquid matter, and hurling along, in rapid succession, opaque masses, which it strewed every where around. The beauty and novelty of such a scene in the animal kingdom, long arrested my attention, but, after twenty-five minutes of constant observation, I was obliged to withdraw my eye from fatigue, without having seen the torrent for one instant change its direction, or diminish, in the slightest degree, the rapidity of its course. I continued to watch the same orifice, at short intervals, for five hours, sometimes observing it for a quarter of an hour at a time, but still the stream rolled on with a constant and equal velocity. About the end of this time, however, I observed the current become perceptibly languid, the opaque flocculi of feculent matter, which were thrown out with so much impetuosity at the beginning, were now propelled to a shorter distance from the orifice, and fell to the bottom of the fluid within the sphere of vision; and, in one hour more, the current had entirely ceased.
The following morning, I separated, with great caution, from the rocks, a variety of flat and branched sponges, and examined their currents through the microscope, with a candle, in a darkened apartment, which is certainly the mode of seeing these currents best through the double reflecting microscope. The currents of water were distinctly visible in every species of sponge which I examined; and, even where the apertures were scarcely seen by the naked eye, the microscope shewed a powerful current issuing from them. In all the specimens, the currents were seen to flow continually from the apertures, however long they were observed; and the discharge of excrement which always accompanies the stream never fails to make its appearance, even though the purest water is employed. The velocity of the stream, in the same species, corresponds very much with the entireness of the branch employed, its recentness from the sea, and the fewness or smallness of the apertures in a given space. The branched species shew the currents best by this mode of examination, because they can be adjusted to the microscope with least mutilation of their bodies, and are most conveniently managed from their smallness and lengthened form. The Spongia coalita, which has a glistening or membranous surface, with very few apertures, exhibits a powerful stream; while the Spongia oculata, Spongia xerampelina, and Spongia pahnata, which have a more open woolly surface, propel their discharge to a shorter distance from their numerous circular apertures.
On attempting to examine some of the larger flat species,  as the Spongia panicea and Spongia cristata, in the same manner with the microscope, I found it not so practicable. The dissection necessary to reduce them to a smallness fit for examination under that instrument, and in a watch-glass, threw open the canals so much as to destroy their means of manifesting a concentrated current. But a single papilla torn from a Spongia papillaris,or other spreading sponge, which has the papilla much elevated, shows distinctly the current flowing constantly from it, when placed in a watch-glass with sea-water under the microscope.
From the distinctness of the currents seen by this means, I was induced to try whether they might not be perceived by the naked eye, although they had escaped the observation of so many naturalists, and particularly of Montagu, who states, in the Memoirs of the Wernerian Society, that he could not perceive these currents, even with the assistance of a glass. On placing a fresh placentiform mass of the Spongia panicea in a glass ofclear sea-water, I could distinctly perceive, with the naked eye, particles propelled to the surface of the water from a large circular orifice in the centre of the mass. I afterwards placed a portion of the Spongia cristata in a shallow vessel, and covered it to the depth of half an inch with water. The orifices along the ridges at that distance from the surface, created a current there visible to the naked eye, and particles of dust floating on the surface of the water were drawn into the stream, and carried to the distance of two or three inches from the apertures. I suspended a Spongia compressa by its pedicle, in its natural position, with its aperture downwards; and even in this small animal I could perceive a languid current issuing, and opaque particles occasionally propelled. The currents from this species are best examined by the microscope, but still are comparatively languid: this sponge has a villous surface, and very large apertures, which arc circumstances generally accompanying a weak current.'
The Spongia panicea presents the strongest current which I have yet seen, and has the greatest thickness of body of any spreading sponge which I have met with on the rocks of this part of the Fritli of Forth. Two entire round portions of this sponge were placed together in a glass of sea-water, with their orifices opposite to each other, at the distance of two inches; they appeared to the naked eye like two living batteries, and soon covered each other with feculent matter. I placed one of them in a shallow vessel, and just covered its surface and highest orifice with water. On strewing some powdered chalk on the surface of the water the currents were visible at a great distance, and on placing some small pieces of cork or of dry paper over the apertures, I could perceive them moving, by the force of the currents, at the distance of ten feet from the table on which the specimen rested. A portion of soft bread, pressed between the fingers into a globular form, with a diameter larger than that of the orifice, and placed over it, was not moved away in a mass by the stream, but was gradually worn down by the current beating on its sides, and thus propelled to a distance in small flakes. A portion of unburnt black-coal, with twice the diameter of the orifice, was instantly rolled off the mouth of this living fountain, in whatever position I attempted to make it rest upon it. A globule of mercury, of equal diameter with the orifice, let fall upon it through a glass tube was not removed or shaken, and completely stopped the current. I now pierced, with a needle, a thin superficial canal, in the vicinity of the closed orifice, and established a new current, which continued, even after removing the obstruction from the original orifice. 
A globule of mercury, of any smallness, placed over the orifice of a living sponge, is too heavy to be affected by the small column of water which impels against its smooth round surface, flowing at the rate with which it issues from that orifice, and is useful in enabling us to stop up the currents of certain orifices, in order to direct the stream with greater force through a particular aperture, which we wish to examine through the microscope. By adopting this plan with a healthy Spongia panicea, which has generally very few and large orifices on the surface, we can distinctly perceive, with the naked eye, that the current never enters by the same apertures through which it issues, and we might thus measure the whole strength of the forces employed to produce the currents in any particular specimen.
But as the Spongia cristata was the kind in which Mr Ellis imagined he saw the water pass to and fro through the same apertures, I placed, in a glass of clear water, a portion of this sponge, which consisted of a single ridge, with a range of projecting apertures along its vertex, and on examining, for some time, with a pocket lens, each of the apertures in succession, through the transparent sides of the vessel, I found that they all sent forth a constant and uninterrupted stream of water from the interior of the animal, with occasional discharges of opaque feculent matter. In order to be still more satisfied that none of the apertures were destined to receive or inhale water, while others propelled it from the animal, I placed under the microscope a small branch of the Spongia coalita, on which there were only three apertures, and I found that, however long I watched them, they were always employed in conveying water from the interior. But as it was still by no means impossible that, while my attention was fixed on one aperture which discharged water, another, which I had just quitted, might now be inhaling that fluid, I took from the rocks some specimens of the Spongia cornprcssa, constructed like a small white paper bag, with only one round aperture at the extremity of the body; and on placing each in succession under the microscope with sea-water, I found that these animals sent forth from the only aperture of their bodies a slow but constant stream.
H thus appears, that the round apertures on the surface of a living sponge, are destined for the conveyance of a constant stream of water from the interior of the body. This stream conveys away the particles of excrementitious matter constantly separating from the interior of the canals, and which are not only seen, by the assistance of the microscope, constantly issuing from the apertures, but are even perceived by the naked eye propelled occasionally in flakes; and when a portion of any kind of living sponge is allowed to remain for a day at rest, in a white vessel filled with the purest sea-water, accumulations of feculent matter are always seen immediately under each orifice. The feculent matter of the Spongia palmata,Spongia oculata, and Spongia xerampelina, consists of a very fine dark-brown dust; while in the Spongia panicea and Spongia cristata, it consists of larger flocculi of a dark-grey membranaceous substance. The streams likewise convey from the interior of the animal, along with the excrements, certain soft, round, small bodies, generally of an opaque yellow colour, which are distinctly seen disseminated through the whole texture of most marine sponges, and which, for the present, we shall consider as the ova. The round apertures may, therefore, without impropriety, be termed fecal orifices, in order to distinguish them from the pores of a very different nature, which are destined to transmit water into the interior of the body.
The fecal apertures are raised to the extremities of projecting papillae, in such sponges as cover the sides of rocks, in order to convey the excrements beyond the pores and general surface of the animal. In the Spongia oculata, Spongia palmata, Spongia xerarnpelina, and such branched species as have a soft downy surface, the fecal orifices are ranged in close order along the outer margins of the branches, and very few are observed on the flat surface, in order to prevent the excrement from falling in the direction of the flat woolly surfaces, which would be very apt to retain it, and thus choke up the groups of pores which are seen every where over their surface. Such branched sponges have not, and do not require, projecting papillae, because they hang suspended by a narrow stem, and are kept sufficiently clean by receiving gentle undulations from the constant motions of the sea. The same applies to the soft downy white Spongia compressa, which always hangs down, and whose orifices are always marginal. The bright yellow porous placentiform mass of the Spongia panicea has no papillae; indeed the fecal orifices are sometimes even lower than the general surface of the animal, and I have never seen this sponge, excepting on the under surface of rocks, with its orifices perpendicularly downwards; so that the excrements fall clear of its surface by their own gravity, without the assistance of papillae. The flat species which are found encrusting Fuci, Sertularise, Corallines, or other moveable bodies, have very seldom prominent papillae, because they are cleansed by the agitations of the sea like the branched sponges.
What relates to the cleanliness of their surface applies equally to their means of receiving food; for it is only in proportion to the free entrance of water, through the minute pores on its surface, that these animals enjoy health or existence; and we shall find the arrangement, form and structure of these pores, beautifully calculated to prevent the entrance of all grosser particles into the interior of the canals.
Mr Ellis was probably led to imagine that the currents passed to and fro through the same apertures, and thus to compare these openings to Polypi, by observing the irregularity of the feculent discharges, which do not coma out in particles, and in a constant stream, but generally in flakes at intervals, in the species which he examined; or he may have been deceived by the appearance of the whirlpools that are generally seen at the sides of the apertures when they are near the surface of the water. But it was of much importance in the physiology of the sponge, to determine precisely the nature and direction of these currents, because the power of sucking in and throwing out water by the same orifices, like Polypi, hitherto ascribed to this animal, necessarily implied the existence of two other properties which it has long been supposed to possess, the power of contracting and dilating its apertures, and that of contracting or shaking its whole body when touched.


