
The existence of siliclous spicula in sponges, and in other genera of zoophytes, has been long known. Pallas sixty years ago described theAlcyonium aurantium, Alcyonium cotoneum, and Alcyonium asbestinum, as composed of minute asbestine needles, which he compares in hardness to pumice. Ellis seventy years ago, Gmelin, Lamouroux, have described the hard glassy needles composing the axis of the Gorgonia briareus, an animal which possesses remarkably large eight-tentaculated polypi. Montagu has described these rigid asbestine or pumice-like spicula in three of his described species of British Sponges, Spongia penicillus, S. verrucosa, and S. pilosa; and the same hard glassy asbestine or silicious needles have since been observed in different species of Tethya, Cydonium, Spongilla, Cliona, and in a great variety of marine sponges. The extreme hardness of these spicula, however, is the only character mentioned by preceding authors as indicating silica to be their component earth. Not only the hardness of these spicula, and their power of resisting heat, but also their regular forms, their sharp points, and even their mode of arrangement in several sponges, were known to our countryman Ellis, who has described the spicula of the Spongia tomentosa, and represented their mode of grouping round the pores (Cor. PI. xvi. fig. D.), and mentions, that when they are burnt and rubbed on the human skin, they pierce it, and excite an itching pain. The regular forms of the spiculaof several sponges have been represented in the plates of Ellis, Cordiner, Lamouroux, and they have been noticed by most writers, as Ellis, Gmelin, Montagu, Lamouroux, and Lamarck, in their descriptions of certain species. Donati had shown the example so early as 1750, by describing and representing the forms of the spicula, and their mode of arrangement in other zoophytes; the useful example of Donati has been rarely followed, but its advantages in the study of polymorphous zoophytes will probably one day be more highly appreciated from the constancy and preciseness of the character it affords. The sponges in which I have found the spicula to consist of silica, I have termed silicious sponges, to mark them as a separate group, distinct from the horny and calcareous species already described. The spicula of silicious sponges are generally smaller and simpler in their forms than the calcareous. They can be more easily examined as the connecting animal matter enveloping them can be completely removed by the blowpipe, or by concentrated acids, without injuring their symmetrical forms, and they can thus be quickly obtained isolated for microscopical examination, OB plates of glass, or between thin scales of mica, where they may be preserved for any period. The Spongia papillaris of Pallas, Gmelin, Montagu, and Lamouroux, which is by far the most abundant species of this animal inhabiting the British shores, affords a good illustration not only of the silicious axis, but of that peculiar simple form of spiculum, which I have considered as the first or most elementary in marine sponges. This species is mentioned by Pallas, as an inhabitant of the coast of America. Montagu found it common on the coast of Devonshire, and I have found it abundant on several parts of the east and west coasts of Scotland, on the north coast of Ireland, and on theshores of Bute, Islay, lonn, Staffa, Skye and Arran; but I have nowhere met with it so large and abundant as on the south side of the Frith of Forth, where it seems to enjoy its natural climate. It is generally seen at low-water mark, spreading on the sides of rocks as a thick soft spongy covering, of a yellow or green colour, with numerous conical tubular papillae projecting irregularly from its surface; its prominent papillae are all terminated by wide fecal orifices, with thin translucent margins, sometimes quite circular, and sometimes presenting a very irregular broken outline. It occurs in portions, from half an inch to an inch thick, and from a few inches to more than a foot in breadth; sometimes it appears as a single isolated papilla, growing on the side of a rock, or on the root of a fucus. Its surface is sometimes very smooth, sometimes slightly corrugated and uneven, and is every where covered with very minute regularly formed pores, visible to the naked eye, which give the surface the appearance of the finest gauze. The papillaris not only has a great range of colour from bright yellow, through the intermediate shades, to dark sea-green, but it likewise presents the greatest variety of surface of any of the spreading species met with in the Frith of Forth; and, I have no doubt, that some of these varieties of outward form, have been described and represented as distinct species. The papillae, though generally very irregular in their distribution, not unfrequently unite from their proximity, so as to form elevated ridges; and when these ridges happen to lie in a straight and parallel direction, they give the surface a crested appearance, as represented by Mr Ellis. At other times, we observe the papillae so slightly and gradually raised, as to produce only an undulated smooth surface; this is frequently the case where it is much exposed to the direct force of the waves or currents, or where it envelopes the roots and stems of marine plants. It is more probable that these varieties of form depend on situation, or other accidental circumstances, than that they are perpetuated by generation; for we sometimes find these different kinds of surface on the same specimen. Where the papilla has a regular conical form, the margins of its fecal orifice are circular, thin and translucent, but in the ridged portions the fecal orifices are often very wide, with abrupt irregular broken margins; when we look down into one of these wide orifices, we distinctly perceive, on every side, the terminations of the internal canals, which unite and widen as they approach the orifice, and open at such an angle, as to throw their currents nearly in the direction of the main stream. This part of the anatomy is beautifully exhibited, by cutting a living papilla perpendicularly into several sections. The ova, in this species, begin to appear in the deeper parts of its substance between the canals, near the end of February; they are in full maturity in May, and not a trace of them is discernible in its texture at the end of June. The surface of the papillaris is often quite green, although its whole texture within is filled with ova of a lively yellow colour; and sometimes we find a specimen, some parts of which are yellow, and others green, although the whole interior is equally filled with ova. In dried specimens of the papillaris the internal texture may be rendered as soft as the finest down, and of a pure white colour, by careful and repeated maceration in hot water; in this condition, the part covering the whole outer surface appears like a thin white calcareous crust, lying loosely over the downy texture, and everywhere closely perforated with regular minute angular pores, which are now rendered more distinct, by the removal of their soft parts, and by the contraction of the loose fasciculi which surround them This thin white shining porous covering contains no lime, but appears to have been sometimes taken by authors for a calcareous crust, both in sponges and in other allied genera.
When a very thin portion, cut from the surface of the recent papillaris, is viewed on a plate of glass under the microscope, we observe the whole texture to consist of polygonal pores systematically, though somewhat rudely, constructed of loose fasciculi of minute transparent, colourless, pointed, and slightly curved, needles, entirely imbedded in a viscid yellowish translucent matter; and we cannot fail to be convinced, on the slightest inspection, that the form, size, composition, and arrangement of these needles have a perfect relation to the function they fulfil of forming and defending these passages, and that the spicula could not possibly have been pushed into this dense systematic order round the pores, by worms, insects or animalcules piercing and traversing the soft surface, nor have we the least acquaintance with any inhabitant of the ocean, capable of secreting such singular crystalline bodies, and of piling them up into so complicated a fabric for the protection and development of its ova. We shall see further proofs of this in the anatomy of the soft parts of this animal. By allowing a portion of this sponge to remain a few hours in a watch glass with nitric, sulphuric, or muriatic acid,: the soft connecting matter dissolves, and the spicula fall separate to the bottom, without having suffered any change in their size, form, or appearance. If we rub these spicula with a wooden or glass rod against the bottom of the watch glass, after pouring off the acid, and washing them with water, we feel distinctly, that they are of a hard quartzy nature, and that they cut the bottom of the glass; with a lens we can perceive the minute streaks they produce, when they are rubbed on the surface of smooth glass. At a red heat the spicula suffer no change, but when they are kept at a white heat for a few minutes by the blowpipe, they become semiopaque and white, and some of them are observed to dilate and burst. When the spicula have been simply dried, we can perceive by the microscope a distinct cavity within them, extending their whole length, and completely shut at both extremities; probably some fluid matter within that cavity prevents it from being so distinctly seen in the recent spicula. To try in a more satisfactory manner the silicious nature of these spicula, I removed the animal matter by means of the blowpipe from a portion of the papittaris, and formed the remaining dried axis into a paste, with three or four times its bulk of pure potassa. On exposing this mixture of spicula and potassa, on a tin plate for a minute or two to the flame of a can die, a white brittle dry crust was produced, which was entirely soluble in water; on examining the aqueous solution of this crust, under the microscope, I found that the silicious spicula had been fused by the aid of the alkali, and had entirely disappeared. I have now preserved the specula of this sponge for more than twenty months immersed in nitric, sulphuric, and muriatic acids, and they have suffered no change in their hardness, size, transparency or symmetry; they still scratch glass, and retain their sharpest points unblunted. From the spicula suffering a diminution of their transparency, by the action of heat, it is probable that they possess some animal matter in their composition, which, however, would be very difficult to demonstrate. Mr Children is said to have detected animal matter in the silicious spicula of some species of Tethya, but his experiments have not yet been made known. I have not had an opportunity of trying their solubility in fluoric acid, and have relied on the above chemical characters, in examining the silicious spicula of marine sponges. The spicula of the Spongia papillaris very much resemble those of the Spongi afridbilis; they are slightly curved, thickest in the middle, from which they taper gradually to a sharp point at each end, they are of one form though of very different sizes, their length ranges from the tenth to the fifteenth of a line, and their diameter from the sixth to the tenth of that of a human hair. They have a vitreous lustre, their texture appears quite homogeneous, and their internal cavity occupies scarcely a third of their diameter. They exhibit neither joints, fibres, nor granular bodies in their substance, nor any kind of motion of themselves, or within their cavity, and appear incapable of contributing to produce the currents of this animal, both from their arrangement round the pores and canals, and from their internal cavity being completely shut at both ends. A number of these spicula lying in the same direction, and close to each other, form a fasciculus,the fasciculi which lie parallel to the surface, and form the strong walls of the pores, may be called the bounding fasciculi of the pores, to distinguish them from certain others, which project from the margin over the entrances of the pores, and are termed the defending fasciculi of the pores. Both bounding and defending fasciculi are seen also in the course of the canals, and the hounding fasciculi near the pores are observed to afford attachment to a very delicate apparatus calculated for the further defence of these passages from foreign bodies, and for assisting in the production of the currents. To avoid erroneous hypotheses in-searching into the nature of this perplexing substance, it will be of some advantage to notice every minute piece of structure which may illustrate its mode of existence, explain its functions or help to distinguish the species, and it will be proper here, as in other parts of anatomy, to adopt a technical language for parts that are of constant occurrence, and important in the economy of the animal. Although the spiculum of this sponge agrees with that of the spongilla friabilis in being curved, and pointed at both ends, it differs from the latter in being thickest in the middle, and a little less in size. This double pointed fusiform curved spiculum is met with in several other sponges, and always occurs unaccompanied with any other form but its own modifications, so that it affords a determinate and easy means of subdividing the great tribe of silicious sponges into lesser groups. We observe this first form of spiculum likewise in the Spongia urens or tomentosa, cristata, coalita, oculata, prolifera, dichotoma, pdlmata, &c., but in the four last branched species it is very minute and imbedded in a tough ligamentous matter, which, in the dried state, assumes a faint resemblance to the horny tubular fibres of the S. communis. It would appear from examination of some tropical species, that the transition from the silicious to the horny axis takes place by the spicula becoming more and more minute, and their enveloping matter more tough and fibrous.
The second remarkable form of silicious spiculum met with in marine sponges, is that which presents only one pointed extremity, while the opposite end is either simply rounded, or is dilated into a distinct spherical head, like that of a common pin. In the species already frequently mentioned in this memoir, under the name of Spongia panicea, and which agrees with the characters given of that species by Lamouroux, in forming irregular spreading masses more than an inch thick, and presenting in the dried state a white cellular texture, like hard bread, with a flat and very porous surface, we have the most familiar and distinct example of the one pointed spiculum. The spicula of the panicea are silicious, straight, thick, short, cylindrical, pointed rather obtusely and suddenly at one extremity, and rounded, but not swelled at the other; they are of various thickness, but of one form and length, they are fused by the aid of potassa, resist heat and acids, scratch glass, &c. In specimens of the panacea which I brought this summer from the Island of Staffa, the spicula have the same characters as in those which abound in the Frith of Forth; and thesame form of spiculum is met with in the Spongia parasitica of Montagu. In the large Spongia patera of the Indian seas, many specimens of which have been lately brought to Europe, and six of which are preserved in the Museum of our University, measuring from two to four feet in height, the spicula are silicious, long, thick, cylindrical, slightly curved, pointed at one end, and in place of being simply rounded or truncated at the opposite end, like those of the panicea, we observe them all headed like pins with a distinct sphere or round bead on one extremity, which has twice the diameter of the rest of the spiculum. I have elsewhere shown that this one-pointed, curved, headed spiculum, occurs in the Cliona celata, a zoophyte possessing polypi and very distinct irritability., (see p. 80), so that it would be highly interesting to examine whether the cuplike sponges,found so abundantly near Sincapore, do not manifest likewise some signs of contractility in the living state. •inijA. third distinct form of spiculum, met with in silicious sponges, is where one of the sharp points is lost, and the whole spiculum appears to be composed of a series of round transparent beads, diminishing in size from one extremity to the other. This remarkable form I have yet observed only in one species, a thick, branched, tubular, yellowish brown, rough, wiry sponge from the Indian seas, from the zoological collection of a zealous young naturalist Mr John Coldstream of Leith. The branches are about 11 inch in diameter, cylindrical, dichotomous, tubular, of a hard and very tough texture, and marked from the outside with distinct open round pores, which pass directly through the thick parietes, and open into the internal tubular cavity by somewhat larger orifices. These tubular branches are of course open at their free extremities for the exit of the currents; their openings are cylindrical, wide, and with rounded margins. The remarkable notched spicula are seen with the naked eye projecting on every side perpendicularly from the margins to the centre of the pores, in which position they are fixed by a tough and almost horny substance enveloping their bases. Notwithstanding, the regular notched or jointed appearance on the outer surface of these spicula, we perceive with the microscope that they are formed of one piece, and have a distinct continuous cavity within, shut at both ends, like every other cavity observed in marine spicula. They are comparatively strong spicula, from their thickness and shortness, and are acutely pointed at one end. The connecting matter enveloping their thick ends, resolves itself by maceration into bundles of delicate ligamentous threads; but this appearance is never to be trusted in sponges which have once been allowed to dry, as parts then become hard and fibrous, which we observe in the living state to consist of a soft homogeneous pulp. This third form of spiculum is so very distinct from the two preceding, that it is probably not confined to this one species of zoophyte, but may be found, like the other two forms, to belong to an extensive series, yet unknown, however, to naturalists, and concealed like the present species in the depths of the southern hemisphere.
A fourth form of silicious spiculum is seen in the long slender asbestine filaments, composing the axis of the Spongia ventilabrum, Linn. When a portion of this fan-shaped sponge of the British, Norwegian and American coasts is kept for some minutes at a white heat by the blowpipe, to remove the animal matter, and is then plunged into strong nitric acid, it becomes easy to reduce it by the pressure of a glass rod, into its component spicula, which we feel by the pressure as well as by their resisting the acid, to be of a silicious nature. They are neither pointed at their extremities nor notched on the surface, but consist of smooth, long, uniformly thick, transparent, waved rods, obtuse at both ends. Those forming the so-named woody veins of this species, lie close and parallel to each other in dense fasciculi, which arc disposed in a longitudinal direction from the base to theapex of the sponge. And the spicula which form the loose porous surface, have one end inserted into the dense central fasciculi of the woody veins, while their opposite end projects outwards at, right angles to these fasciculi. The waved direction of the remarkably long silicious filaments of this sponge is a necessary result of the kind of basket-work they are employed to construct. The same form of spiculum is met with in the Spongia hispida and S.fruticosa Mont.; but in the fruticosa it is very short. 
These general forms of silicious spicula are variously modified in different species of sponge, though they are regular and constant in the same; and there may be many other general forms which have not fallen within my limited observation or belonging to species yet undiscovered. As the slender vitreous spiculum, acutely acuminated at both ends, is the form met with in the simplest and most irregular of the marine sponges, and also in the fresh-water sponge, a simpler and older zoophyte than any of the marine species, this spiculum may be considered as the first or simplest in the silicious sponges. It is easy to observe, however, in these sponges, that only one of the acuminated points of the spicula is employed in the defence of the pores and canals, while the other sharp point is fixed and imbedded in the tender substance of the animal, which it is apt to pierce and tear on the slightest motion. The second form of spiculum, therefore, where the unnecessary and probably hurtful imbedded point has been removed, either by being simply struck off, as in the S. panicea, or by being still further softened by the addition of an enlarged spherical head, as in the S. patera, seems much better adapted for insertion into the soft texture of this animal, or for defending its pores and canals, and probably was of later formation than the preceding form. It is found in some tropical species, in the Cliona, an animal already possessed of distinct irritability. The numerous inequalities of the waved surface and the extremity of the third form or jointed spiculum must add to the safety and strength of its attachment to the soft parts. The shortness and thickness of this spiculum peculiarly fit it for warding off the assaults of extraneous bodies from the pores of this animal, for which office it seems to be allotted in the specimen before me. It may be supposed, that, at the time of its formation; animalcules of a larger magnitude swarmed in the heated ocean; arid this stronger mechanical protection of the pores seems to have been the more necessary, as no animals had yet been formed which could contract and shut their superficial pores by a vital effort like the Cliona, Alcyonium, Lobularia, &c. It is interesting to observe, that the earthy matter of the skeleton of these earliest inhabitants of the ocean, is the same with what we know to have paved the bottom of the vast abyss at the remotest periods we can reach of the earth's history, whether we imagine the silica of the primitive rocks formed by the oxidation of the solid surface, or precipitated from the superincumbent fluid. The appearance of many of their crystalline silicious pointed spicula is the same with that of the slender hexaedral acuminated prisms which silica naturally assumes in the crystallized state; and the silicious crystals formed by nature contain cavities and fluids like those formed by organic life. The laws, therefore, which regulate the forms of the simplest silicious spicula composing the skeleton of the marine sponge, do not appear to differ much from those which regulate the forms of brute matter.
