On public grounds, and as an old fellow-labourer in the same rich field of philosophic inquiry, I avail myself of the opportunity afforded in publishing this brief outline of the primary divisions of the Animal Kingdom, to dedicate 
these pages to you in testimony of my admiration and approval of your late successful attempt to throw further 
light on that involved and obscure question, regarded by some inquiring minds as the mystery of mysteries of or- 
ganic nature, the origin of species by natural law ; or, as you have more happily and more definitely expressed the 
problem, "the origin of species by means of natural selection, or the preservation of favoured races in the struggle 
for life." 

More than fifty years have now elapsed since the Zoonomia of your illustrious ancestor. Dr. Erasmus Darwin, 
first opened my mind to some of "the laws of organic life," which he so clearly expounded, and so successfully applied to explain the abnormal phenomena, of the human body ; and nearly forty have already rapidly fled away since you and I were busied in exploring microscopically the delicate structures and the living phenomena of the lowest organisms aboimding in the rich fauna of the Frith of Forth. 

But while I have been humbly occupied with the gleanings of our fellow-labourers in the cabinets and seminaries 
of Europe, and reporting the results to my youthful auditors, you have been widely surveying the grand domain 
of nature "with a learned spirit over the oceans, seas, islands, and continents of the globe, in every latitude and 
in every clime, nearly from the one pole to the other, and accumulating that rich store of thought and observation 
which entitles you of all men to aspire to the complete solution of those great, though obscure problems of organic 
nature, which have so long perplexed philosophers; a labour which you have so successfully commenced, and in 
which you have already surpassed all your predecessors, from the time of Plato. 

Intellectual triumphs like yours, which have been hailed with the assent and applause of all competent unbiassed 
minds at home and abroad, while they charm away the clouds of mysticism which overhang some parts of our 
science and of philosophy, and obscure the greatest truths of nature, alone add permanent glories to the annals of 
our country in the great struggle for intellectual preeminence and ascendency among the nations of the earth. 
With one fell sweep of the wand of truth, you have now scattered to the winds the pestilential vapours accumulated 
by " species-mongers " over every step of this ever-varying, ever-charming part of nature's works ; and your next move- 
ment will dispel the remaining clouds of "mystical supernatural typical intrusions" which still hang on the horizon 
of the sublime prospect, now opening to the view, of the natural animalization of the orbs of space by the same 
simple laws which govern the physical and chemical phenomena with such wondrous harmony throughout the rest 
of the material universe. 


This outline of the classification of existing animals is extracted from the manuscript notes of the more 
extended Course of Recent Zoology given in University College, with the view of its proving a useful accompaniment to the Student in the approaching Elementary Course, both as pointing out the exact order followed in the Lectures, and thereby directing him in the reading of other works, and as explaining by definitions some of the principal difficulties of nomenclature occasionally felt by beginners in the study of Zoology. 


INTRODUCTION. 



1. MATERIAL BODIES. 

- Our notion of the separate existence of an outward material universe rests chiefly on the causes of our various mental 
impressions being apparently independent of our consciousness itself, and seemingly inherent in some distinct 
common connecting substratum exterior to the mind, independent of the will and acting upon our consciousness 
through the medium of impressions made on the outward senses. 

This outward substratum or material substance, the bond of all our varied sensations and ideas, thus inferred to 
occupy outward space, and to be perceptible by the medium of our senses, composes all the objects of the visible 
and tangible universe which alone it is the province of Natural History to investigate and describe, as far as 
their properties, phenomena, and laws of action can be revealed to us by the careful and legitimate use of our 
Senses and faculties in the study of nature. To express more distinctly the relations of natural objects to 
each otlier, and to render more uniform and precise the language of their description, material bodies are divided 
into kingdoms, subkingdoras, classes, subclasses, orders, suborders, genera, subgenera, species, subspecies, varieties 
and subvarieties ; and these terms are never interchangeable, but reserved strictly scientifically and technically for 
the divisions to which they are respectively applied. Thus the material substances composing the entire system of 
outward nature are conveniently divided, according to their physical and chemical constitution, the properties they 
manifest, and the active forces with which they are endowed,into the miaeral, the vegetable, and the animal kingdoms. 

2. MINERAL KINGDOM. 

Mineral bodies are unorganized, and exist in the solid, flidd, or gaseous condition, merely according to their tem- 
perature. Their ultimate chemical elements are mostly united in binary combinations ; in structure they are homo- 
geneous throughout ; crystalline or amorphous ; and they increase in bulk mechanically by the simple addition of 
similar matter to their surface. They do not live, or grow, or feel, or generate, or die ; and their inherent active forces 
are chiefly manifested in the simpler phenomena of gravitation and chemical afiinity. By the forces of gravitation 
and affinity the particles and masses of matter tmite and combine to constitute the bodies diffused through cosmical 
space; and by recent experiments on the light emitted from distant luminaries, it is proved experimentally that 
their material constituents are the same as those of our earth, as was early conjectured by Newton from the uni- 
versality of the laws of gravitation. 

The force of gravitation as expressed by the weight of bodies is merely in the direct ratio of the quantity of 
material particles in their mass; but when united by chemical affinity, the kinds of forces acquired are always 
different from the mean of those of the combining atoms ; and this acquisition of entirely new properties or forces is 
equally the universal result and the most certain test of their chemical union. Thus water, carbonic acid, and 
ammonia, are the most common mineral elements in nature ; but when they chemically combine in favourable conditions to form a particle of gelatine or albumen the product no longer conducts itself as a mineral substance ; and no limit can be discovered, theoretically or practically, to the new properties thus acquired by ternary and quaternary combinations of mineral elements. 

By abandoning the legitimate path of philosophical inquiry, by adopting the ancient dogma of the inertia of matter, and by overlooking all familiar manifestations of material forces in the ordinary phenomena of nature, Plato was led to devise a hypothetical system of causation and supernatural agencies not discoverable by science, and to refer all striking results of natural laws to preconceived designs of his fancied agents. As it is easier to imagine than to discover, the general adoption of this error regarding the forces employed in the production of natural phenomena aiTested the progress of science among the Greeks, and left the most important discoveries to a later period, when the proper interpretation of nature was resumed. 

The cautious and careful scrutiny of the properties and conduct of particles and masses of matter in space has been rewarded by the discoveries of the laws of gravitation acting throughout the universe, the order of superposition of the stratified rocks composing the exterior crust of the globe, the law of definite proportions in chemistry, the law of storms, the conservation of the physical and vital forces, the origin of the animalization of our planet from the chemical union of the elements of organic nuclei, the laws of the migration of the earth's axis of rotation in terrestrial physics, the origin of all organic species by natural law, and many others, which have entirely revolutionized modern science, and greatly extended man's dominion over 
nature. 

3. VEGETABLE KINGDOM. 

Vegetable bodies are organized, or possess an internal arrangement of soft parts adapted for the transmission of 
fluid nutriment for growth by intussusception ; and their ultimate chemical elements are mostly united in ternary 
combinations. They are nourislied only by mineral matter, which they chemically change, organize, and endow with 
vital forces; and their chief ultimate elements are carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen. Carbon is their predominant and 
characteristic element. In structure they are mostly cellular or vascular, without internal stomach or locomotive power, 
fixed and insensible. Their primitive cells possess a special internal lining of cellulose. They are not homogeneous 
throughout; and their differentiated parts perform special functions in the general process of nutrition. They decom- 
pose foreign mineral matter, and assimilate it to their own tissues. They live, grow, generate, and die. Heat and light 
are the principal known forces which act on the elements of plants ; and under their animating influence they give 
out oxygen in respiration, assimilate carbon, and organize mineral matter for the food of animals. For the humble 
class of assimilative functions of plants, the higher animal endowments of consciousness and volition seem to be little 
required. Without an internal common receptacle of food, they absorb fluid nutriment through their roots, their 
general surface, or their leaves, and secrete by virtue of the vital endowments of their constituent cells. The latent vital forces of their complex organic elements are again restored at death by the formation of simpler mineral compounds, and by the evolution of heat, light, combustion, fermentation, and the development and animation of new cells, vegetable or animal, 
during their decomposition. They contribute also during life to the same conservation of forces, by the periodical 
shedding of leaves, flowers, secretions, fruits, bark, &c., as the moulting, the metamorphoses, and the ejectamenta of 
animals. Although the double layer of the ultimate vegetable cell and its contained fluid indicate a greater diffe- 
rentiation of structural parts than in the ultimate simple sarcodous cell of the animal, the vital manifestations and 
endowments of the latter already transcend those of the vegetable, and indicate the possession of a higher class of 
forces. 


4. ANIMAL KINGDOM. 

Animal bodies are organized for the internal assimilation, of fluid organic matter, and are mostly endowed with the 
power of locomotion and the property of sensibility. Their ultimate chemical elements are commonly united in quater- 
nary combinations ; and their chief elements are nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon, nitrogen being their most 
characteristic constituent. They do not subsist on mineral matter, but are mostly fui'nished with an internal stomach 
for the reception and assimilation of organized substances, vegetable or animal. In their organization they have a 
preponderance of soft and fluid parts, which renders the balance of affinities among their multiple elements more 
easily disturbed, and their whole economy more pliant, mutable, and perishable. Like plants, they are nourished 
only with fluid matter transmitted through membranes, and always originate from the chemical union of fluid ele- 
ments, never by evolution from indefinite ancestry. In respiration they consume oxygen and give out carbonic acid. 
They not only live, grow, generate, and die like plants, but also feel and move. The complex elements of the tissues of 
animal bodies, first elaborated in the vegetable kingdom and further metamorphosed in their own economy, are 
endowed with a higher class of vital forces, and adapted for the production of more varied and complicated living pro- 
ducts, and living phenomena, than those of plants. The nuclei of their first formative cells, like all other products 
of animal growth and organization, originate de novo from their fluid organic elements, either in the infusions of 
organic matter in the exterior waters of the globe {Monadinea), or in the interior of bodies already organized {En- 
docystica), never by evolution from indefinite ancestry. The great proportion of soft and fluid parts in animal 
bodies, and their very complex chemical constitution, accelerate their decomposition after death, when they mostly 
return their elements to the simple binary compounds, gaseous, fluid, or solid, of the mineral kingdom, whence they had passed into the plant. But a great part of their high vital forces accumulated and latent in the living condition, or expended in maintaining that condition, now set free, manifest themselves in the production of heat, light, odorous emanations, and most of all in organizing and vivifying the nuclei of myriads of monadine animalcules in the act of their formation from their fluid organic elements. 

5. ORGANIZATION OF ANIMALS. 

An animal is an aggregate of living organized parts, harmoniously combined to effect, by their united actions, 
the nutrition, the locomotion, and the generation of the body. When some single determinate part of the body is 
specially appropriated and organized for a limited portion only of the complicated processes which constitute the life 
of an animal, it is termed an organ. When several organs combine to effect the processes of some complicated func- 
tion of the economy, as digestion, circulation, or respiration, they constitute a system of organs. In the complex 
organisms of the highest animals the whole body is composed of many systems of organs, all acting harmoniously 
to the same end, the preservation of the individual and of the race. The organs composing the animal body are thus 
classified according to their functions.

But as we descend in the animal scale the internal structure simplifies, organs and systems of organs disappear, and 
at length every special organ and special function is entirely lost, and the simple soft gelatinous sarcode, alone 
remaining, like a universal blastema, has, in every part of it equally, the potentiality of its own simple nutrition, mo- 
tion, and generation.  

The sum of the entire vital forces, however, which animate their various organisms for the production, not only of 
their intricate physical phenomena, but of their highest intellectual manifestations, is always in the direct ratio of 
their general complexity of organization, or their stage of elevation in the animal scale. From this essential consti- 
tution and mechanism of the entire animal frame, it follows that the chief characters of distinction among individuals 
and groups of animals are mere structural or morphological differentiations in accordance with the ever-varying 
conditions of their life. 

6. CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMALS. 

A methodical arrangement or classification of the animal kingdom, being designed to assist the memory, and to point 
out the natural relations of the objects to each other, should present to the mind, at least in the great primary 
divisions, some distinct, obvious, and important principle of association, and should therefore be founded on the mo- 
difications of some one of the most influential organic systems of the economy ; it should arrange animals nearly 
according to the degree of complexness of their general structure, without violating the general affinities by which 
groups of animals are naturally connected with each other ; it should contain a proportionate number of divisions, of 
whatever grade, for the number of the objects to be classified, and should distribute the objects in convenient pro- 
pdttiott among the divisions adopted. 

The motosensitive axis of the nervous system of animals is the source of the highest phenomena of animal life ; it is 
the sole part of the animal body endowed with consciousness, or sensibility to impressions made upon it, and the 
chief centre of the higher vital forces it is most constant in its occurrence, and greatly modified im form, throughout 
the animal scale ; its modifications of form are well marked, they typify more than any other system the general form 
of the body they closely accord with the grade of the entire organization of animals, and they are practically ap- 
plicable for the establishment of primary divisions of the animal kingdom. 

The history of existing animals belongs to Cainozoology, and that of extinct forms to Palaeozoology. The existing 
races, which alone concern us here, are not descended from each other, although from more simple common ancestry, 
and they do not, therefore, form the links of a continuous chain from the monad to man. They are all equally co- 
existent, independent, and unconnected with each other, like the extreme peripheral buds of a tree of life, wHose base 
is largely concealed or consumed in the earth, but whose more recent branches can be readUy traced through all the 
surviving fossiliferous strata of the globe. Such ramifying trees of life, however, have never ceased to originate and 
develope de novo, in the same mode as the first, since the first found a suitable habitat ; and it is neither necessary 
nor philosophical to assume that any animal type had a different mode of origin from that of another, the durability 
of a type being the best proof of its natural origiu. The so-named species of living animals, being thus unconnected 
and independent, may here be arranged from the highest to the lowest forms, without violating any natural relations ; 
but in palseozoology they might follow more naturally the descending line of their pedigree, from simple to complex, 
or from ancient to recent forms. 



