MY chief object at present is to mention to the Society, some recently discovered sandstone petrifactions which have been found in this neighbourhood. The occurrence of such substances in our common sandstone quarries is, we know, not unusual ;—particularly petrifactions of a sort of flattened reed, of a gigantic size. These I have frequently seen, both in the sandstone of Ayrshire, and of Mid-Lothian, viz. in the coal formation sandstone of these districts. The originals of the petrifactions alluded to, are thought by many to have been of the palm tribe. But this, I believe, no one has yet fully ascertained. With respect to the coal formation in general, it is observed by our President, in one of his many interesting and valuable publications, that it is well characterized by the great number and variety of its vegetable petrifactions. He informs us, that these are principally of such plants as flourish in marshes and woods, and that they occur abundantly in the sandstone of this formation.
An instance is given by Habel, in his Natural History of Nassau, of a petrified vegetable stem, as having been seen by him rising 40 feet through coal formation rocks, and measuring a foot in diameter at one of its extremities. Now, though the petrifactions to which I allude, are not nearly of so great a length as this, they are of a diameter still greater; one of them being 3 feet 10 inches in circumference at the thickest extremity.
They were found on the 9th of February last,alittle way from Harvieston, ten miles to the south of Edinburgh, by some workmen, while engaged in making a drain. They were in a horizontal position, imbedded in a mass of what I would call sandy-clay, about 3 feet below the surface. The petrifactions are three in number, and have evidently been the trunks of trees. They were lying with their tops towards the east, and in a conformable position to the strata, which are here coal-sandstone, and dip gently to the west. One of the trunks is 5 feet 9 inches long; and, as already said, 3 feet 10 inches in circumference at the bottom; it tapers rather suddenly, being 2 feet 2 inches in girth at the middle, and 1 foot 6 inches at the upper end. About 18 inches from the top, there has issued a large branch. This petrifaction is somewhat flattened or compressed, as all those generally are, which lie conformably to the strata. It has, when set on end, and viewed at a few yards distance, completely the appearance of the decayed stump of a tree. From the shape, I should pronounce it an oak; but the bark has rather more of a dotted appearance than is usual in the oak. The large branch going off about 4 feet from the root, strongly characterizes it as the trunk of a tree. The next largest petrifaction is 2 feet 7 inches long, and 3 feet 1 inch in circumference at the bottom, having much the same appearance on the surface as the first. But the third, which is in length 2 feet 6 inches, and in girth at the bottom, 3 feet 5 inches, has the very appearance of a peeled oak; in so much, that any person whose eye is familiar with such objects, would at once refer it to this tree.
The sandstone into which these vegetables have been converted, is rather fine-grained, and so hard as to approach the kind commonly called Quartzy Sandstone. It may be thought rather singular, that the petrifactions themselves should be so much harder and more solid than the stratified matter in which they were imbedded. This, as I said before, is a soft loose mixture of sand and clay. I remember some years ago, meeting with a petrifaction of this sort, in the firm sand, on the sea-shore, to the west of St Andrew's, in Fife. It was the stock of a tree seemingly in situ, about 20 inches diameter, laid bare by the waves, and the roots running nearly horizontally in all directions. It appeared to have been cut over by the surface of the ground. I can not pretend to say, whether the great African Desart is of the same formation with that in which the petrifactions I have been speaking of are found; but it appears from travellers, particularly Mr Horne- man, that this immense sandy deposit is, in many places, full of innumerable fragments of petrified wood. Trunks of trees 12 feet in girth are mentioned: and Horneman says, that though these petrifactions are generally black, yet, in some cases, they are ash-grey, and resemble natural wood so entirely, that they are sometimes brought in by mistake for fuel.
  By what process of Nature does the wood, on such occasions, disappear, and particles of quartz, cemented by clay, or marl, or other quartz, take its place? This appears to me to be a matter by no means easily accounted for, on any principles at present recognized. And the difficulty is augmented in a very high degree, when we adopt the commonly received doctrine of the mechanical formation of sandstone. For how can we conceive, that small pieces of quartz, so large, however, as to be sufficiently discernible by the naked eye, should make their way into the densest parts of an oak tree, and in time so completely displace all its woody fibres, as that nothing of these should appear, but the whole become a uniform mass of these little pieces of quartz, connected together as before stated? We cannot admit, certainly, that a particle of sand, or piece of quartz, so large as to be visible by the naked eye, should at once make its way into the interior of the wood, and there take up its residence, accompanied or followed by other pieces of the same kind. No expansion of the vegetable pore that we can conceive, would be adequate to allow this. And, therefore, if the petrifaction of the wood takes place by means of the gradual accumulation and cementation of particles of sand already formed; or, in other words, small pieces of quartz already formed, we must suppose the process to go on in some such manner as the following. The wood dissolves in the surrounding medium, whatever that medium may be; and there can be no doubt, that the outer parts of it, as being most exposed to the action of the medium, will dissolve first. The particles of sand then take the places of the particles of the wood, and are deposited exactly in the same situation. Moreover, we must suppose, that they are at the same time fixed together by the cement, be this what it will, clay, or marl, or other quartz; for, if that were not the case, how could the places of the sandy particles be so exactly preserved? But if they are cemented together as soon as they are deposited, a close coating of sandstone will thus be formed all around the tree ; and how shall the interior of it afterwards be petrified? The particles of sand can no longer reach it. They cannot make their way through the sandstone already formed. And though we might thus, in some sort, see how a thin coating of sandstone might be deposited round a piece of wood, or other organized matter, we cannot possibly see how the inner part of it should be petrified. But when we inspect the petrifactions of which I am speaking, we find the inner parts of them equally solid, and equally converted into stone with the exterior:—nay, if any difference, more so. It also appears to me, to be difficult to apprehend how the particles of sand should penetrate the lower parts of the wood equally with the upper, contrary to the law of gravity; though, perhaps, the principle of pressure may help us out here.
  But if we reject the opinion of sandstone being a mechanical deposit, and conceive it to be a chemical precipitate, in the same way as some other stony substances undoubtedly are, then, I think, the explanation of sandstone petrifactions, though by no means divested of difficulty, will be very much facilitated. For, on the supposition that the quartzy or siliceous matter of which the particles of sandstone are composed, were dissolved in a fluid, then we can more readily form an idea of the manner in which this solution,havingpenetrated thewood,might there precipitate its contents, and so produce the appearances we observe. And though even here a difficulty presents itself, (for what becomes of the carbon and other indestructible parts of the vegetable) yet the difficulty is not, I think, so great as when we suppose the mechanical formation of the sandstone. We know that all the different parts of wood except the carbon, can be resolved into gaseous bodies, and even it, by combining with oxygen, becomes gaseous also. In this way, therefore, the vegetable matter may all escape, and the quartzy or siliceous take its place. And if it be asked, whence the carbon should receive the oxygen, to render it gaseous, or to form carbonic acid? The answer is obvious—from the water; for water seems always to be present during the petrifying process.
Few, I believe, will now be startled at the idea of sandstone being a chemical deposit. Our President's two ingenious papers, "On the Mineralogy of the Pentland Hills," and "On Conglomerated Rocks," published several years ago in the Memoirs of this Society, have rendered it familiar to us, and have, I think, proved that sandstone is, in some instances at least, a chemical deposit. The Professor has there shewn, that what have been taken for fragments of previously existing rocks cemented by a basis, are in fact contemporaneously formed concretions, as much as the masses of felspar, of quartz and of mica in granite, or of the quartz itself in granular quartz, and other crystalline rocks. I shall not attempt to go over the ingenious arguments by which this position is made' out, and by which it is shewn to be very highly probable, that grey-wacke also and trap-tuff, and in many cases sandstone, as well as conglomerated rocks of the primitive class, such as granite, gneiss,mica-slate, porphyry.and limestone, have had a chemical origin, and are not, as has been commonly thought, made up of waterworn or fractured pieces agglutinated by a basis. I shall only observe, that one of the strongest of these arguments appears to me to be the gradual passage of the apparent fragments into the basis by which they appear to be cemented: and this, I think, indeed, so strong, that scarcely any thing more is wanted. But as abundance of evidence can do no harm, I would take the liberty to suggest, that the occurrence of petrifactions in the situation of those I have before described, seems to me to form an additional proof of the correctness of Mr Jameson's opinion. I have attempted to shew, that these appearances may be accounted for on the hypothesis of sandstone being a chemical deposition, but that they are quite inexplicable, on the supposition of its being a mechanical formation. Now, the argument stands thus: Sandstone petrifactions do occur; but these cannot have been formed mechanically. They must, therefore, have been formed chemically; and hence sandstone has, in them at least, had a chemical origin. But if it has had a chemical origin in one instance, it may have had the same in another.
The importance of the study of petrifactions will not now be disputed. For as it was owing to the observation of these in the strata in which they occur, that people were first led to speculate on the manner on which these strata must have been formed, (and hence our different Theories of the Earth,) so it is only by the study of petrifactions that we are likely to be able to account for the formation of strata, or to ascertain the relative ages of the mineral masses of the crust of the earth. If there had not existed any petrifactions or fossil remains of organized bodies, it is not easy to see how a theory of the earth should ever have been thought of. Philosophers would naturally have rested satisfied (as the vulgar do,) with the notion that all things were originally formed in the state in which they now are.
But when they observed the remains of organized bodies in situations in which, beforehand, they could not have been expected to be; when they observed sea-shells many hundred miles distant from the sea, and some thousands of feet above its level; when they found those and other fossil remains many fathoms below the surface of the ground, and imbedded in vast masses of solid mountain rock; nay, when the remains of animals were discovered, of which no prototypes now appear, or whose species we have every reason to conclude have been long ago extinguished; what philosopher would not speculate on the causes of such surprising effects? Hence arose, as I already noticed, our various theories of the earth. But it was the celebrated WERNER, the great Founder, we may say, of Experimental Mineralogy, that first pointed out with precision, the importance of the study of the fossil remains of organized bodies, towards enabling us to arrive at any thing like a rational theory. It was he who first observed,—and the observation is of the utmost importance,—that different petrifactions characterise different Formations.
But on this subject I shall not at present enlarge, as I may, perhaps, at a future period, trouble the society with some observations on it in a different shape.
CUVIER, has done much in this department, and apparently without knowing what Werner had done before him. He has demonstrated, not only that, without the existence of petrifactions or extraneous fossils, we never could have known, or in all probability never would have suspected, that there were successive formations or depositions of the strata and other enormous masses which compose the crust of the Globe; but that by observing these, we pursue the track which is alone likely to conduct us to a knowledge of the causes of these depositions: Or rather (in more precise language, perhaps), which is likely to lead us to the knowledge of the real order of their succession.
  It is his opinion, however, that other causes besides those which we at present observe to operate in nature, must have then existed. But this is evidently giving up the question; it evidently amounts to the assertion, That the laws of the physical world were formerly different from what they now are. And if so, then I am afraid we never can understand how these laws operated. It is the same thing as to tell us, that petrifactions were formed, we know not how. For a law of nature different from any that we at present know, is, I apprehend, to all intents and purposes, the same thing to us as no law at all. On this principle, therefore, we must for ever despair of heing able to account for petrifications; or to refer them to any law of nature now known to exist. With all deference, however, to this very great man, I would not so readily abandon the hope that the presently existing laws of nature may be found sufficient, under certain modifications, to account for all the phenomena we observe. I would not yet say with him, that in physical history the "thread of operation is here broken, the march of Nature is changed, and none of the agents that she now employs were sufficient for the production of her ancient works." I would rather join with him in a hope which he elsewhere expresses, "that a Newton may arise in Natural History as "well as in Astronomy," and think it provable that some principle, as little suspected of the power of doing so, as Gravity once was of the power of explaining the planetary motions, may one day enable us to explain all the phenomena of Geology. At any rate, let us not too hastily cut the Gordian knot, especially after M. Cuvier himself has done so much towards enabling us to untie it.


