
IN the spring of 1836 we proceeded from the south coast of the sea of Marmora to Brusa*, and thence up the previously unexplored course of the river Rhyndacus to its sources, whence we crossed to the Plain of Hushak, and descended the valley of the Hermus to Smyrna. In the following year, one of the authors (Mr. Hamilton) followed a track nearly parallel to the above, but from thirty to fifty miles further westward, or from Cyzicus to the river Macestus, and across the Demirji range to Koola (lat. 38° 31', long. 28° 44'). These two excursions, and a third previously made (by Mr. Strickland) into the valleys of the Mseander and Cayster, together with journeys in the valley of the Mreander, and a voyage from Smyrna to Rhodes (by Mr. Hamilton), have supplied the materials for the following sketch of the geology of a portion of Asia Minor J.
  Our principal object has been to describe correctly the phaenomena which we observed ; but as geological facts are dry and uninteresting without arrangement, we have ventured on such a classification as the rocks of Asia Minor appeared naturally to admit. We are, nevertheless, well aware how imperfect such a first attempt at generalization must be in a country which had been only partially explored, and concerning the geology of which, we could obtain very little satisfactory information from external sources. We wish, therefore, the general views here advanced to be considered as provisional, and open to correction ; our only source of confidence in them being derived from the general simplicity of materials and uniformity of arrangement which mark the rocks of Asia Minor, and which render the task of classification much easier than in many other districts of equal extent. It remains, however, a question of some doubt, how far the relative antiquity of the metamorphic rocks can safely be depended upon ; and whether they are not in some instances really secondary deposits, which have been acted upon by the volcanic and igneous influences, which have operated so abundantly throughout the peninsula of Asia Minor.
Physical Structure of Western Asia Minor.
   The western part of Asia Minor is thickly beset with mountains, some of which form chains of considerable extent, but others are more isolated and indefinite in form. These mountains are often alpine in their character, and present many points of interest to the general observer. They rise for the greater part abruptly from horizontal plains, the smooth and verdant surface of which is strikingly contrasted with the rugged outlines of the surrounding mountains. It will be seen hereafter, that this abrupt transition from mountain to plain is the result of peculiar geological conditions. (See postea, p. 13.)
   On the great scale, the prevailing direction of these alpine chains is nearly east and west. This latitudinal strike is exhibited in no less than six parallel ranges.
   1. The chain of Olympus. This mountain-tract commences with Mount Ida (lat. 39°40'), whence a range of high land extends eastward to the Mysian Olympus, the snowy summit of which is about 7000 feet above the sea. Beyond this point, the same chain re-appears under the ancient name of the Bithynian Olympus, and ranges eastward as far as the Halys. The chain sends numerous streams from its northern slope into the sea of Marmora and the Euxine ; and the Macestus, Rhyndacus and Sangarius, conduct the drainage of its southern slopes through transverse gorges, the two former into the sea of Marmora after passing through the lake Apollonia, and the last directly into the Euxine.
   2. The chain of Temnus or Demirji (lat. 39° 5'). This range is furcated at its western end, inclosing the valley of the Caicus. These branches unite to the N.E. of Thyatira, and form the chain of Demirji, which constitutes the watershed between the Hermus on the south and the Macestus and Rhyndacus on the north, and terminates in Morad Dagh, near Kutahiyah.
   3. The chain of Tmolus commences with Mount Tartali near Smyrna, and forms a narrow and lofty ridge, which, after dividing the valleys of the Hermus and Cayster, passes to the southward of Koola and terminates to the S.E. of Takmak.
   4. The range of Messogis (lat. 38°), which commences at Ephesus, and divides the fertile plains of the Cayster and the Maeander. At its northern end it unites with the range of Tmolus, and thus completely separates the Caystrian Plain from the surrounding country. It then extends eastward to the south of the Maeander, until it joins the southern end of the chain of Bourgas Dagh, and forms the southern boundary of the great plain of Hushak and Gobek.
   5. The range to the south of the Maeander, which, commencing with Mount Latmus (lat. 37° 35'), extends past the lofty .height of Cadmus to the eastward, where it merges into the Taurus chain, and continues with a general easterly bearing to the Euphrates. The drainage of the northern flank of this extensive range is effected, in the western portion, by the Maeander. Further eastward is the ancient district of Isauria, the drainage of which is collected into lakes and marshes with no apparent outlet. The waters on the south side of the Taurus range, flow by short courses into the Mediterranean.
   6. The islands of Crete and Cyprus, though south of the district we are here
describing, may be regarded as tbe crests of a submarine chain of mountains belonging to the same system of elevation, as the five parallel ranges above described.	
   The only important exception to the east and west direction, which prevails in the cases above enumerated, is found in the range which extends from Morad Dagh (lat. 38° 52', long. 30° 9') towards the S.E., where it assumes the name of Sultan Dagh, and forms the watershed between the sources of the Mseander and the great central plain of Asia Minor. This range connects the eastern end of the Demirji chain in an oblique direction to the middle of the Taurus range.
Classification of the Rocks of Western Asia Minor.
   The rocks of this district, as far as we are acquainted with them, admit of being classed into the following geological groups, in ascending order :

A.—SEDIMENTARY ROCKS.
§ 1. Micaceous Schist and Marble. 
   This series occupies a very important place in Asia Minor, constituting the greater portion of the mountain-chains which intersect the country. It consists principally of micaceous schist, with which are associated beds of white or bluish crystalline limestone and stratified quartz-rock. The latter deposits seem to occur in no determinate order, hut are interstratified with the micaceous schist, into which they often pass imperceptibly. Clay-slate is of very rare occurrence in this group of rocks, and we saw but few instances of slaty cleavage distinct from the stratification. Veins of white quartz are as frequent as in similar rocks of most other countries. The formation is very uniform in its characters, and the list of minerals which we found in it, is very scanty. On the whole, this group of semicrystalline deposits bears much analogy to the gneiss and mica-schists of the Scotch Highlands, and may therefore, in the absence of definite evidence as to age, be referred provisionally to the primary or transition epoch.	
Thin scams of mica often pervade the marble, which is then capable of being split into slabs; and they greatly assist the labours of the stone-mason. The vast abundance of marble in Asia Minor enabled its ancient inhabitants to carry architecture and sculpture to their highest perfection ; and the numerous antiquities which remain in this interesting country, prove that in these arts the Asiatic Greeks fully equalled their kinsmen of Europe.
   The quartz rock of this formation is more local than the crystalline marble. In its purest state it is white with a glassy lustre, and it is identical in appearance with the quartz rock which occurs in veins. Its origin however is very different, for it is distinctly interstratified with beds of micaceous schist. Laminas of mica are often disseminated through the quartz, and when these predominate, the rock passes into regular micaceous schist.
  As might be expected in formations of such antiquity, the stratification of this group is very irregular, both as to the amount and direction of the dip. The strike however is more constant, and commonly coincides with that of the mountain-range in which the observation is made.
  The following are the principal localities where rocks of this group are exhibited :
  (a.) The island of Proconnesus (sea of Marmora), N. of the granitic ridge of Cyzicus.—Large quarries of white marble exist here, and have given the modern name of Marmora to the island, as well as to the adjoining sea.
  (&.) Cyzicus.—Near Erdek (ancient Artaki), at the south-western extremity of the promontory of Cyzicus, thick beds of argillaceous schist and crystalline marble occur, having a S. and S.W. dip. The upper portion of the promontory of Melanos, a mile S.S.W. of Erdek, consists of crystalline marble dipping S.W. and resting upon beds of argillaceous schist. The dip is quaquaversal, and evidently caused by the granite which forms the central mass of the Cyzicene peninsula.
  (c.) Aidinjik, S. of Cyzicus (PI. III. Sec. 1).—The strata here present a steep escarpment to theN., rising to the height of 900 or 1000 feet, while the hill slopes much more gradually to the S. down to the lake of Maniyas. The summit of these hills consists of a fine-grained crystalline marble, extensively quarried a little further eastward, whence marble was probably obtained to supply the wants of Cyzicus, one of the most splendid cities of antiquity in point of architectural decoration. The marble is interstratified with beds of schist of various colours, red, black, purple, yellow, and white, the whole dipping S. and S.E. by S. at angles of 70° or 80°.
  (d.) Mount Olympus of Mysia (PI. III. Sec. 2).—We did not ascend to the summit of this precipitous mountain. It appears however from the evidence of several travellers*, that a part at least of its loftier regions is composed of grey granite. All the lower portions of the mountain which we explored, consist of rocks of the schistose group. The ravine above the town of Brusa exhibits the Section No. 2. The upper beds consist of fine-grained crystalline marble, dipping N.E. about 25°. The marble passes downwards into micaceous schist, approaching the texture of gneiss ; and it is penetrated by quartzose veins, which are sometimes slightly granitic.
   A long ridge of schistose rocks runs to the westward from Mount Olympus, between the Rhyndacus and the Lake of Apollonia. The same formation also occupies the S. side of the Rhyndacus, till we enter the lacustrine basin of Har- manjik. Throughout this district, the rugged hills of mica-schist and marble scarcely admit of cultivation, and are for the most part covered with forests of pine.
   The chain of Demirji —We have no evidence of the structure of the western part of this ridge ; but at Mumjik, on the Macestus, the pebbles and boulders, brought down from its higher parts, consist of quartz, gneiss, and a large-grained, micaceous granite. On the low part of this ridge, S.E. of Simaul (Sec. 6), these older rocks are concealed by younger sandstones. We had no opportunity of visiting the lofty insulated mountain of Ak Dagh; but its appearance so greatly resembles that of the mountains of Argseus and Hassan Dagh, as to warrant the supposition, that it may be a vast trachytic mountain analogous to those of Mont Dor and the Cantal. (See Geol. Proceedings, vol. ii. p. 651.) The ridge connecting Ak Dagh to Morad Dagh is composed of schistose rocks, and appears to be the eastern continuation of the Demirji range. This ridge, which bounds the plain of Azani on the S., sends off, along the W. side of the same plain, a branch, in which marble predominates. It probably joins the mountain of micaceous schist which we crossed between Taushanli and Go- zuljah. (See PI. III. Section No. 5.)
   (/.) Morad Dagh and .Sultan Dagh.—The branch ranging westward from Morad Dagh, between the Hermus and the Plain of Hushak, consists of schist with occasional beds of marble. The same formation composes Bourgas Dagh, a ridge which bounds the Plain of Hushak on the east, and is connected with Morad Dagh and Sultan Dagh. Along the west foot of this ridge, we found an abundance of stratified quartz rock, passing into micaceous schist.
   (g.) Mount Tmolus (PI. III. Sec. 3, 6, 12, and 13).—The portions of this range, which we visited, consist of micaceous schist with occasional beds of marble. At Nimphi, about fifteen miles east of Smyrna, mines of gold and silver are recorded to have been worked in the Middle Ages; and we can hardly suppose that the traditions respecting the golden sands of the Pactolus had not some foundation in fact, although they have been unproductive since the time of Strabo*. At present no metalliferous veins are worked in Mount Tmolus, but this may be owing to the paralysing effects of ignorance and despotism, rather than to the actual scarcity of the precious metals.
   The chain of Tmolus expands to the south-west of the Catacecaumene, and a branch from it crosses the Hermus at Adala (PI. III. No. 13), and is probably connected with the range of Demirji. About four miles west of Koola, we found some coarse garnets inthe micaceous schist,—the only examples of that mineral, which occurred to us in Asia Minor. The schistose rocks near Koola also abound in crystalline marble (PI. III. No. 12), which was extensively quarried in ancient times near the village of Ghieurdiz ; and three lateral ridges of the same schistose rocks extend to the northward in the district of the Catacecaumene, constituting, as will be hereafter shown, some of the most remarkable features of that district. At Aktash, between Koola and Takmak, a large crystal of oxide of titanium was found, and veins of the same substance are disseminated through the micaceous schist.
   Qi.) Mount Messogis, (PI. III. Sec. 3).—The mountains around Ephesus, anciently called Gallesus, Prion, and Pactyas, abound in marble; and the ancient cities of Metropolis and Ephesus were built on solid masses of it. The town of Scala Nuova stands upon an insulated rock of blue marble, a portion of that branch of Mount Messogis which stretches toward Ephesus, while the other extends S.W. toward Mount Mycale. Marble is less abundant in the ridge of Messogis Proper, and none was noticed in crossing from Aidin to Tireh. The range here consists of pure mica-schist, occasionally penetrated with ferruginous matter. On the north of Tireh the hillocks, which jut through the alluvial plain of the Cayster, consist of schist and marble.
   (i.) Erythrce.—In the bay of Ritri, opposite the island of Scio, Mr. Hamilton found a great development of grey and blue crystalline limestone, resembling that of Ephesus already described, and extending in a semicircular line round the ruins of the ancient town. In many places all traces of stratification were obliterated ; but near the ruins of Erythrae, he found thin vertical beds of limestone and indurated sandstone, with veins and small masses of quartz. Some of the beds are much contorted, and the strike is nearly north and south. The Acropolis stood upon a lofty rock of red trachyte; and although the exact line of contact could not be traced, the marble was observed to be much shattered near the junction with the trachyte. The anchorage is formed by two large wooded islands, about 11 mile from the shore. The largest is called Karabagh, and consists of the same blue crystalline limestone ; but apparently very thickly bedded, for no trace of stratification could be perceived.
  (k.) Boodroom (lat. 37°, long. 27° 25').—The high hills which rise behind the town of Boodroom (anc. Halicarnassus) consist of blue, compact, semi-crystalline marble belonging to this formation. In some places it is interstratified with thin bands of siliceous limestone, or cherty beds, which being less easily acted upon by the atmosphere, stand out more prominently than the rest. As far as our imperfect knowledge of the physical geography of Caria will enable us to judge, these hills belong to a S.W. branch of the fifth great mountain-chain before mentioned (p. 4), diverging off from the lofty range of Mount Cadmus.
   (Z.) Cnidus (lat. 36°40', long. 27° 22').—The promontory of Cnidus, forming the extremity of the Doric Gulf to the south, Boodroom constituting that to the north, consists of thin-bedded limestone-shale, overlaid by thick-bedded blue marble ; the dip being to the S. and S.W. from 45° to 60°. This formation was observed several miles up the promontory, and is composed of the following beds in a descending order :
   The summit of the peninsula towards the west, consists of thin-bedded calcareous shale and a concretionary rock dipping to the S.W.; and of thick-bedded grey marble containing caves and fissures, many of which arc covered or filled with stalactitic calcareous deposits, resembling in colour some varieties of oriental alabaster.	'
   To the eastward of the hollow in which stood the ancient city, the marble reappears, dipping in the same direction, and is interstratified with a hard greenish sandstone grit.
   The hills rise rapidly towards the E.N.E., attaining, at the distance of about two miles, a height of above 2000 feet. This summit is formed by a very narrow ridge of rocks, a quarter of a mile in length from N.W. to S.E., consisting of thinly laminated calcareous shales, dipping S.W. at an angle of 45°, and presenting an almost precipitous escarpment towards the N.E.
   (m.) Rhodes.—The blue crystalline marble occurs frequently on the east coast of the island of Rhodes, near the town of Lindo, dipping 25° N.W. It forms high hills, against which the tertiary shelly limestone reposes, as shown in Section, p. 14. The Acropolis of Lindo is built upon strata of it, also dipping to the N.W. It occurs likewise further north, between Rhodes and Archangelo, where, besides the high range of hills about two miles from the sea, another low ridge of rocky points of the same formation rises up in the middle of the plain nearer the sea, forming a low ridge parallel to the coast. In one place, between Lindo and Archangelo, this rock was observed to become harder and schistose, and to pass into a hard black crystalline limestone, with a slightly concretionary structure like the Silurian limestone of the Bosphorus ; it likewise dips to the N.W., but at a much greater angle.
§ 2. Cretaceous System. (PI. III., Sec. 1.4 and 6.)
   The fossils found in this group of rocks, prove it to be the equivalent of the “ Apennine Limestone ” of Italy, Dalmatia, the Ionian Islands and Greece. The following are the localities at which we have evidence of its occurrence :
   (a.) The Northern Flank of the Olympus Chain.—The south shore of the Lake of Apollonia (lat. 40° 2', long. 28° 35') consists of compact, fine-grained, pale yellowish limestone, resembling the Apennine limestone of the Ionian Isles. We did not succeed in finding fossils. It extends for about eighteen miles in a nearly straight line from E.N.E. to W.S.W., dipping at a high angle into the lake ; and it apparently rests upon the schistose rocks which range from Mount Olympus to the westward. The same limestone occurs on the north side of the hills between the Lake of Maniyas and Susugherli (Sec. 1). It is accompanied by argillaceous shales and micaceous sandstones, which at the latter place form hills on both sides of the Macestus. Higher up that river, between Ildiz and Kebsit, is a range of schistose hills, in some places very micaceous, and in others resembling argillaceous slate. Huge masses of compact white limestone are exposed on the hill sides in several places, and appear to be allied to the hippurite limestone rather than to the schistose series.
   (b.) The upper Basin of the Hermus.—An arenaceous deposit which occurs in this district, we are inclined to refer to the newest portion of the secondary series. We first observed it on the north slope of a range of schistose rocks, which extend westward from Morad Dagh, between the Hermus and the Plain of Hushak (PI. III. Sec. 4). It is well exposed in the ravine east of the village of Makouf, where it consists chiefly of brown micaceous sandstone, finely laminated; but it is not crystalline or compact, like the schistose formation above described. Some thin beds of soft white limestone were here noticed; and a little further north, a conglomerate of rolled pebbles of quartz, marble, mica-schist, &c., is interstratified with the sandstone.
   On the south of the schistose ridge, between Sorkoum and Hushak (Sec. 4), is a zone of brown sandstone and quartzose conglomerate, dipping from 40° to 60° to S.W., which is probably referable to the same age. A similar sandstone occurs on the north side of the Hermus, between the ridge of Demirji and the Catacecaumene. On the south of Simaul (Sec. 6) it occupies the whole surface of the ridge, which is there very low, and consists of thinly-laminated sandstone, containing mica, and breaking into large slabs. It extends thence southward for about five miles, where it is overlaid by a tertiary tufa. About eleven miles further south, the laminated sandstone reappears on the banks of the Ai'neh-chai, dipping from 30° to 40° S. by W., and is covered unconformably by the horizontal tufa. The accompanying section is well exposed in this deep ravine, the hills on each side of which rise to the height of 600 or 700 feet.
   These sandstones appear at intervals on the sides of the river to the distance of six miles below Selendi. They are nearly horizontal, and on the south side of the Aineh-chai have a slight northerly dip, reposing against a low ridge of saccharine marble, which ranges between that river and the Hermus. On the south of this axis, the sandstones again occur, dipping with a southerly inclination towards the Hermus; and are overlaid by horizontal beds of tertiary fresh-water limestone. The following section in descending order, is exposed about a mile north of the
   The sandstones above described did not occur to us elsewhere in Western Asia Minor. They appear to be devoid of fossils, but are clearly younger than the schistose group,and older than the tertiary beds; and we have therefore preferred, on account of their comparative unimportance, to class them, for the present, under the Cretaceous system, than to assign them a separate place.
   (c.) The vicinity of Smyrna.—The compact grey limestone with Hippurites and Nummulites, associated with greenish argillaceous and arenaceous shales, which form the mountains around Smyrna, are among the best types of this formation, which fell under our notice in Asia Minor. They are described at length in a separate memoir. (Vol. v. p. 393.)
   (id.) The Island of Scio and the peninsula of Kara-bornou consist of compact grey limestones, which we refer to this formation. These naked mountains present precisely the same dull grey appearance, which forms so peculiar a feature in the scenery of Greece and Albania, where similar rocks prevail.
   (e.) Sighajik (lat. 38° 14', long. 26° 50').The rocky peninsula which extends between Sighajik and Teos, and is connected with the main land by the low marshy plain, on which stand the ruins of Teos, consists of a greyish white limestone resembling scaglia, but having sometimes a much more earthy character. It dips slightly to the W. by S. It is generally thick-bedded, and very nearly resembles the lacustrine limestone near Smyrna. In places, it is underlaid by beds of sand and sandstone, containing calcareous concretions; and is sometimes thinly bedded, the strata being separated by slightly micaceous marly waybands.
   if.) Syme (lat. 36°35', long. 27° 52').—The whole of the bare and rugged island of Syme consists of a greyish white compact alpine limestone or scaglia, with occasional nodules and bands of siliceous limestone. It is in general very thickly bedded, but is sometimes thin-bedded, the strata being separated by thin seams of marl or green sand. One of the authors (Mr. Hamilton), who was several days on the island, sought in vain for organic remains. The general stratification of Syme is horizontal ; but toward the north the beds dip 80° N.N.W., whereas to the south the dip is S.S.E. The coast-line is rugged and deeply indented, and the general features and characteristics of the island closely resemble those of the island of Ithaca. The whole of the southern shore of the Gulf of Syme consists of the same formation. The limestone varies a little in colour, being sometimes a pale red. At the eastern end of the Gulf, it alternates with bands of pale red jaspery chert, dipping N.W. 50° ; and it is in places much contorted. Further eastward, the dip is still greater.
   (g.) The Island of Rhodes.—The greater part of that portion of the island which has been explored, consists of those rocks which, under the name of Scaglia, or Apennine limestone, have been considered the equivalents of the Cretaceous system of Europe. This formation is composed in the island of Rhodes of—1st, red and brown sandstone and conglomerates; and 2ndly, of whitish grey or cream-coloured and red scaglia limestone.
   1. 1led and brown Sandstone and Conglomerate—These appear to constitute the upper beds of the system, and are found near the centre of the island. A red conglomerate sandstone occurs between Apol- lona and Embona, dipping S.S.W. 50°, and resting conformably upon white scaglia. Indurated red marls and hard sandstone grits also occur in the same locality. At the foot of Mount Atairo, to the N.N.W., is another bed of conglomerate, containing chiefly boulders of greenstone and a greenish granitic rock, together with rounded masses and pebbles of the grey scaglia, of which the neighbouring hills consist. The igneous rocks were not observed in situ.
   2. Scaglia Limestone.—This formation is chiefly developed in the lofty ridges of Mount Atairo, the ancient Mons Atabyrius, which rises to a height of 3500 or 4000 feet above the sea. The summit is a narrow ridge above two miles in length from N.E. to S.W., which is nearly the direction of the axis of the island. The beds all dip uniformly to the S.E., at angles of 15° or 20°, and present a steep escarpment towards the N.W. The upper portion consists of thick-bedded grey scaglia without flints, and is underlaid by a thinly laminated, schistose limestone with tabular masses or beds of flint, below which again, the beds become thicker and the flints are nodular. These formations constitute the uppermost 900 feet of the mountain, below which the scaglia limestone is interstratified with a red calcareous shale or marly limestone, which is again succeeded by the thick-bedded limestone without flints.
  The Acropolis of the ancient town of Camiro on the east coast of the island, six miles north of Lindo, is built upon an insulated table mass of white or cream- coloured limestone, very compact, and with rather a conchoidal fracture ; and it has every appearance of having once been an island before the tertiary formations, by which its base is encircled, were raised above the surface of the waves.	.
  (/t.) Deenair (lat. 38° 3', long. 30° 22').—The same formation occurs at this place near the sources of the Mseander, where it contains numerous Nummulites. It is so extensively developed to the east and south-east, as to constitute the greater part of the Mount Taurus range; and Nummulites have also been found in it near Adalia.
  The secondary deposits here described under one head, may ultimately prove to have been formed at various epochs, but we are at present too imperfectly acquainted with their organic remains to decide this point. The only fossils found by us, are Hippurites and Nummulites, and these indicate a very recent secondary date, equivalent to that of the Cretaceous system of Northern Europe. These deposits appear to have been affected by the same movements as the schistose rocks which underlie them ; and all our evidence on the subject leads to the inference, that the mountain-chains of this country were elevated above the sea towards the close of the secondary period. It is this circumstance, which has caused that peculiar feature in the scenery of Asia Minor before adverted to,—the abruptness with which precipitous mountains rise out of horizontal plains (See ant&, p. 3). We here find limestones of the Cretaceous age elevated into mountain-chains, which rival in altitude those of the Carboniferous and Protozoic periods in Northern Europe. Those younger secondary strata, which in Britain form tabular or undulating hills, and conduct us gradually from the plains of Essex to the mountains of Wales, have here undergone disturbances on the most gigantic scale. They have also acquired a compactness of texture much more analogous to the Protozoic than to the Cretaceous rocks of Britain. The tertiary strata which have since been deposited around the bases of these mountains have undergone very little disturbance, and almost invariably retain their original horizontality.
§ 3. Tertiary Marine Deposits.
  Deposits of this class are of small extent in Asia Minor, and appear to be entirely confined to the vicinity of the sea-coast. We know of their existence at only the two following localities in Western Asia Minor :
  (a.) The Troad.—The west coast of the Troad, and both shores of the Dardanelles, consist of horizontal strata of light-coloured limestones and marls. We had no opportunity of landing there ; but as Olivier gives the names of several species of existing shells which he found in this deposit, we infer that it belongs to the Pliocene group. A sandstone with Pectines is stated by Fontanierf to occur in Tenedos.
  (b.) The Island of Rhodes.—The N.E. end of Rhodes consists of a yellow, concretionary, calcareous tufa, with beds of sand and gravel almost horizontal, and full of tertiary shells, of which the genera Pecten, Cardium and Venus are the most common. This deposit attains a height of 200 or 300 feet above the sea, forming in many places hanging terraces resting against the steep sides of the blue marble mentioned above j. (See Wood-cut.)
Rhodes.
W.	Cliffs of shelly conglomerate and tuff.	E.

§ 4. Tertiary Lacustrine Deposits. (PI. III., Sec. 1, 3 to 6, and 9.)
  These deposits occupy a large portion of the surface of Asia Minor. We have already stated our belief (p. 13) that the schistose and cretaceous rocks, towards the close of the secondary period, were raised above the surface of the ocean, and formed that tumultuous mass of mountains which still intersects the country. It would seem, that the inequalities of surface thus produced, gave rise to numerous inland lakes, whose vast calcareous deposits denote a long period of comparative tranquillity. At length, by the slow denudation of their rocky barriers, aided probably by the convulsions incident to a volcanic country, these lakes were drained, and the rivers assumed the geographical positions which they still occupy. In the parts of Asia Minor which we visited, nearly every large valley was found to contain these lacustrine deposits; but in the more narrow ravines of the mountain-chains, nothing of the kind was noticed. This fact may enable us to distinguish the modern valleys of denudation from those older depressions, which were caused by the original elevation of the mountains.
   The lacustrine formations of Asia Minor consist, in general, of calcareous marl and white limestone. The latter is often identical in composition with the chalk of England, and the resemblance is further increased by the presence of beds and nodules of black flint. Sometimes the limestones are more compact, and approach in character the Italian scaglia or the Bavarian lithographic stone. Towards the margins of the lacustrine basins, the marls and limestones gradually become sandy and then gravelly, and not unfrequently traces may be found of a regular shingle beach*. (PI. III. Section 5.)
   The lacustrine strata are, with few exceptions, nearly horizontal, and seem in general to have remained undisturbed since the period of their deposition. The lapse of time however has subjected these deposits to extensive denudation, and sometimes nothing remains of them, but a few detached platforms, which skirt the sides of the valleys at the same level, and show the precise form and extent of these ancient lakes.
   The organic remains which occur in these deposits, consist of lacustrine shells and portions of vegetables. They approach very closely to existing forms, though we do not venture to assert a completely specific identity in any of them with the present Fauna or Flora of Asia Minor. No remains of Mammalia or other Vertebrata were noticed during our rapid survey of these deposits; and we wish to call the attention of future travellers to this desideratum in the geology of Asia Minor.
  We now proceed to enumerate the localities at which we met with deposits of this class, though we do not pretend to assert the absolute contemporaneity of all these detached lacustrine basins.
  (a.) The basin of Moudania (lat. 40° 23', PI. I.).—The country between Mount Olympus and the sea of Marmora is occupied by a tertiary formation, but no fossils occurred to us in it. Near Moudania it forms hills overlooking the sea, and several hundred feet in height. The similarity of the white limestone of the beds of flint which accompany it, to the lacustrine deposits of Smyrna and other places, induces us to refer it provisionally to the same group. The formation extends to the Lake of Apollonia and reappears at Kirmasli, whence it sends a branch up the valley of the Rhyndacus as far as Kesterlek.
  (h.) Basin of Dunddr (lat. 39° 50').—This basin is of small extent, occurring in a valley on the S.W. side of the Rhyndacus. The deposit is a soft, white, sandy limestone, dipping at the village of Bourmah, about 10° E.S.E. Here also, having found no fossils, we are guided only by analogy in referring it to the lacustrine group.
  (c.) Basin of Harmanjik (lat. 39° 47').—This is hounded on the north by the schistose hills which form the base of Mount Olympus, and on the S.E. by the volcanic rocks of Eshen. It consists throughout of white limestone horizontally stratified. Like similar deposits in Auvergne and the Cantal*, it contains an abundance of black flint in beds and nodules ; and considerable quantities of gun- flints are made there and sent to Constantinople. Near Haidar, at the northern limit of the basin, is a picturesque gorge, at least 600 feet deep, traversed by the Rhyndacus, which affords an admirable section of the horizontal strata on each side. The limestone contains a small turrited species of Paludina, resembling P. acuta (Michaud), or P. stagnorum (Turton). A species, similar in form but double the size, occurs associated with a Limnsea near the south boundary o^ the basin, about five miles from Harmanjik, and two from Eshen.
  (d.) Basin ofTaushanli (lat. 39° 35').—The trappean rocks of Eshen (postea, p. 23) separate this basin from the last. The lacustrine deposit, if such it be, has received considerable modification from the vicinity of the igneous rocks, which appear to have been in action during its deposition. In place of a pure earthy limestone, we have a peculiar kind of tufa or peperite, composed of particles of quartz imbedded in a felspathic cement, and accompanied by hexagonal crystals of hornblende. Near Taushanli this tufa becomes more calcareous, and contains angular fragments of jasperine rocks f. It is capped by a stratum of brown impure jasper, containing a large proportion of iron|.
  The alluvial plain of Taushanli is surrounded by platforms of this tufaceous deposit,—the scattered outliers of a formation once continuous. No organic remains were noticed.
  (e.) Basin of Gozuljdh (lat. 39° 25').—We crossed this basin in going from Tau- shanli to Azani. It is filled with white limestone identical in appearance with English chalk, and containing strata of black flint. The scenery also strongly resembles that of our own chalk counties, consisting of rounded hills intersected bydry valleys, and covered with fir and juniper. No organic remains were noticed.
  Near the village of Gozuljah (PI. III. Sec. 5) is a section showing the gradual transition of this white limestone into gravel, as it approaches the margin of the ancient lake.
  Basin of Azani (lat. 39° 14').—The ancient town of Azani, the interesting ruins of which are among the best-preserved in Asia Minor, stood in an alluvial plain near the source of the Rhyndacus, surrounded by mountain-chains of mica- schist and marble (Sec. 4). Around the bases of these mountains are beds of gravel, passing into white limestone. The latter rock approaches within three miles of Azani on the south, and has been extensively used in the construction of its ancient buildings.
  The following species of shells were noticed in it:
   (g.) Basin of the Macestus (lat. 39° 20').—The valley of the Macestus, between Kebsit and Boghaditza, is occupied by a horizontal formation of calcareous marl and white limestone, thinly bedded and of chalky texture, containing in some parts many nodules of flint. In the southern portion of the basin, the beds are broken up by the intrusion of igneous rocks, which will be described hereafter, p. 24, (PI. III. Sec. 1). No organic remains were observed.
  (k.) Basin of Ghiediz (lat. 39° 2f).—A deposit of white limestone fills the upper valley of the Hermus, and is contained between two ranges of schistose mountains which run westward from Morad Dagh. No fossils were noticed during our rapid survey. (PI. III. Sec. 4 and 9.)
  (i.) Basin ofHushak (lat. 38° 39').—This is a lacustrine formation of great extent, bounded on the north and east by branches of Morad Dagh, and on the west by the mountains near Takmak, while to the south it extends to the Mseander, and is bounded by the continuation of the range of Messogis. The whole of this area is a nearly level plain (PI. III. Sec. 4), drained by tributaries of the Mseander, which flow in narrow ravines, deeply denuded in the lacustrine limestone, and discoverable only on a close approach. A remarkable case of the kind occurs near the town of Gobek. Here, a vast ravine, at least 600 feet in depth, is surrounded by cliffs of limestone in horizontal strata. At the bottom flows a meandering stream, probably the “ Kopli-sou” of Tavernier. The time-worn cliffs resemble an assemblage of towers, castles and cathedrals, and present a scene which can hardly be depicted by the pencil or the pen.
  In the more southern portion of this plain, where the formations have been cut through by the Mseander, the Banas-chai and the Kopli-sou, the subjacent beds of micaceous and argillaceous schists and crystalline marble of Mount Messogis, together with intermediate beds of sand and gravel, which everywhere underlie the lacustrine limestone, are well exposed along the borders of the ancient lake.
  We found the following organic remains near Kalinkese, in the central part of this basin (lat. 38° 30'):
1. Limnaea, apparently the same as No. 2 in the Azani list (p. 17).
2.  Planorbis, 	 No. 5	
3.  Paludina, 	 No. 9	
4. Minute seeds of Chara (“ Gyrogonites”).
  (k.) Basin of the Catacecaumene (lat. 38° 35').—The tertiary deposits in this basin, consist of horizontal beds of white limestone passing downwards (in the northern part of the basin) into volcanic tufa. The limestones have been deeply denuded by the Hermus and its tributaries, and now form a series of lofty plateaux, frequently capped by tabular masses of basalt, which will be described hereafter, p. 29 (PI. III. Sec. 6, and Sketch No. 11.)
  About nine miles south of Simaul (lat. 39° 5', long. 29° 5') the following section in descending order, of the horizontal tufaceous beds, was noticed:
a. Hard, volcanic tuff, slightly crystalline, with boulders and pebbles of trap, and
numerous concretions of green marl	 12 feet.
b. Soft, earthy, yellowish tufa, with small fragments of pumice	 10 
c. A hard crystalline bed, which, but for its stratification, might be taken for a slightly decomposed igneous rock	
  These tufaceous beds are capped with white limestone, from beneath which they crop out in many places in the sides of the ravines. They rest unconformably on beds of secondary sandstone, as is shown in the wood-cut at p. 11. At the point where that section occurs, seven miles N.E. of Selendi (lat. 38° 45'), the lower part of the tufa, resting upon the sandstone, consists of a conglomerate with large masses and boulders of quartz, greenstone, and other primary and igneous rocks, in irregular waved beds. The strata in ascending become finer-grained and more nearly horizontal, dipping 10° south. (See wood-cut, p. 11.) These appearances may be owing to the violent disturbance and gradual subsidence of a body of water, acted upon by volcanic forces.
  On approaching the Hermus from Selendi, the tufaceous beds thin out, and the lacustrine limestone rests on the secondary sandstone. (PI. III. Sec. 6.) This limestone covers an extensive tract pn both sides of the Hermus, forming table-lands about 700 feet above that river. Between the A'meh-chai and the ruins of Saittae, it contains beds of tabular flint about a foot thick ; and in one place, near a local outburst of basalt, a mass of hard brown siliceous rock, about 50 yards in extent, was found in the midst of the limestone, taking the place of the beds of flint.
  Our attention was too much occupied with the volcanic phaenomena of this interesting district, to search for organic remains in the tertiary limestone ; but from the complete analogy of the formation to those deposits in which fresh-water shells were found, we have no doubt of its lacustrine origin. The drainage of this ancient lake has doubtless been effected by the opening of the gorge in the schistose rocks near Adala, through which the Hermus flows. (Map, PI. I., PI. III., Sketch 13.)
  (l.) Basin of Sardis (lat. 38° 30', long. 27° 55').—The greater part of this deposit has been removed by denudation, but some low hills of limestone yet remain on the south side of the Gygean Lake, and others to the east and west of Adala. A zone of sand and gravel, perhaps of a different age from the limestone, extends along the north flank of Mount Tmolus (PI. III. Sec. 3), presenting a succession of broken hills and ravines, which, backed by the snowy heights of Tmolus, form a scene of the richest beauty. This gravelly formation is subject to rapid destruction ; and the celebrated Acropolis of Sardis, which could once hold out against a Persian army, is now reduced at the top to an area of a few yards square, which a short lapse of time will probably diminish to a point. (Section 3.)
  (m.) Basin of Smyrna.—The lacustrine deposits near Smyrna, with their imbedded shells and vegetables, are fully described in a paper devoted to the geology of that district. (See vol. v. p. 393.)
  (n.) Lower Vale of the Meeander (lat. 38°).—It is with some doubt, that we cite this district in the list of lacustrine basins, as no fresh-water limestone was noticed in it; and the masses of gravel and sand which skirt the south side of Mount Messogis might have been produced by the waves of the sea. However, they have so complete an analogy to those on the north side of Mount Tmolus, that we are inclined to refer them to the same origin, whatever it may be (PI. III. Sec. 3).
  In the valley of the Maeander, these accumulations of detritus form a zone of broken hills, many hundred feet in height, which flank the schistose range of Mount Messogis. They appear to have been afterwards modified by water at a lower level than that wilich originally produced them ; for horizontal platforms of gravel rest against the sides of the loftier hills, at a height of about 200 feet above the alluvial plain of the Maeander. The ancient town of Tralles stood on one of these platforms, defended on three sides by an abrupt escarpment, and on the fourth by its citadel, which was placed on the summit of a lofty peak of indurated gravel and sand. The peculiarity of its situation is most accurately described by Strabo, lib. xiv. c. 1. The gravel consists of rounded pebbles of quartz and mica- schist, derived from the higher parts of Mount Messogis.
  It is remarkable that of these tertiary deposits, so common elsewhere, no trace has been noticed in the valley of the Cayster. This extensive vale is completely insulated by the schistose ranges of Tmolus and Messogis, and the only exit for its waters is through a narrow gorge into the sea at Ephesus. The absence of these deposits renders it probable that the vale of the Cayster has been brought into its present condition at a comparatively recent period ; or if contemporary with the other valleys of the country, we may suppose that, from the absence of a dam to retain its waters, no lacustrine deposit could accumulate.
§ 5. Modern Aqueous Deposits. (PI. III. Sec. 2.)
  Under this head we have to notice only travertine accumulations and river alluvions. Of the former, a remarkable instance occurs at Brusa (PI. III. Sec. 2). The hot springs which rise at the foot of Mount Olympus have the high temperature of 184° Falir.; and they constantly deposit travertine, a platform of which extends about two miles from the springs, along the foot of Olympus, into the town of Brusa. It is here about half a mile in width and 100 feet high. At this end, there are no thermal sources at present, and it is probable that they became stopped up by the calcareous deposit, and found a new exit at the point, where they now flow.
  At Ilijah (lat. 39° 10'), in the upper valley of the Macestus, about seven miles east of Singerli, are some thermal springs of a very high temperature, which have formed extensive accumulations of fibrous and mammillated travertine. One source is ejected a foot and a half above the top of a mound of travertine which it has accumulated, and which is approached by a natural bridge of the same substance formed across a stream from another spring; In one place, the water falls over a cliff eight or ten feet high, producing stalactites in its course.
   The hot-springs of Hierapolis, in the upper valley of the Mseander, flow over a cliff which they have encrusted with white travertine and stalactites. The remarkable appearance here presented, has given the Turkish name of Bambouk-kalesi, or “ Cotton Castle,” to the town, and has excited the attention of many ancient as well as modern authors*.
   Asia Minor presents some interesting examples of the geographical changes effected by the alluvia of rivers. The detrital deposits of the Mseander were so abundant as to excite the attention of Strabo. Since his time, the island of Lade, near which a naval action was once fought between the Persians and Ionians, has become a hill in the midst of a plain ; the Latmic Gulf is changed into an inland lake ; and the once flourishing town of Miletus, losing her commerce from this cause, has become a heap of ruins.
   The alluvia of the Cayster have reduced Ephesus to the same state as Miletus. Her port, once the seat of commerce and civilization, is now a stagnant pool, separated from the sea by a marshy plain, which infects the surrounding district with malaria.
   A similar fate perhaps awaits the now flourishing city of Smyrna. The Delta of the Hermus is fast advancing across the Gulf: a narrow channel only is at present open to shipping ; and a few centuries may see that populous city, reduced to the condition of Ephesus and Miletus.
   The absence of tide in the Mediterranean is doubtless the chief cause of the rapid extension of these alluvial deposits in historical times. The bays and estuaries not being cleansed by the daily reflux of the tide, the alluvial matter brought down by the rivers deposits itself close to their mouths, and their deltas are thus pushed into the sea with a rapidity, of which we have no examples in tidal oceans.
   Under the head of modern alluvial formations, we may mention a singular lacustrine deposit in the valley of the Rhyndacus, above Kirmasli (lat. 39° 56'). A low range of tertiary limestone crosses the valley at that town, and is cut through by the Rhyndacus, which traverses a narrow gorge. A lake once existed on the upper side of the limestone hills, and has left considerable deposits of mud, sand and gravel. The opening of the gorge having drained the lake, the Rhyndacus has since had time to remove the greater part of the lacustrine deposit; but platforms, of it still skirt one or both sides of the valley, at the height of 50 or 60 feet above the more modern plain in which the river now flows. Want of leisure prevented us from searching for organic remains in this deposit, but the appearances, which it exhibits, seem to refer it to the modern or newest tertiary epoch.
B. —IGNEOUS ROCKS.
§ 1. Granitic Rocks. 
   Rocks of this class are rarer in Asia Minor than might have been expected in a country where schistose formations of great antiquity and igneous rocks of a later period are so largely developed. The only good example of granite which fell under our notice, is in the peninsula of Cyzicus. This mountainous mass consists of a fine-grained grey granite, decomposing rapidly in consequence of the felspar which it contains, and thereby producing a luxuriant soil. It also contains large masses of hornblende or amphibole, and is sometimes traversed by veins of felspar.
   This granite appears to have been elevated subsequently to the formation of the schistose rocks, which dip away from it, at Erdek to the S.W., and at Aidinjik to the S. and S.E. by S. (See Section 1.) The marble of the island of Proconnesus on the north, has probably been elevated by the same mass of granite.
   From the occurrence of granite pebbles in the detritus at the north foot of the Demirji chain, near Mumjik (lat. 39° 7', long. 28° 35'), we infer, that granitic rocks exist in the higher parts of that lofty range.
   We have only to add on this head, that M. Texier, whose interesting researches in Asia Minor are in course of publication, informed us, that he had met with granite on the summits of Mount Olympus in Mysia, Mount Tmolus, and Mount Latmus near the mouth of the Maeander. 
§ 2. Greenstone, and older Trap Rocks.
   Igneous rocks, which can safely be referred to this class and period, are not of very frequent occurrence in the western parts of Asia Minor. They were observed by us at the following localities :
   (a.) The promontory of Bozbornou, north of the Gulf of Moudania, consists at its western end of a greenish trap, sometimes forming rounded concretions, which at a distance resembled an artificial wall (lat. 40° 35').
   (&.) Immediately behind the town of Moudania a compact, green, trappean rock appears above the surface, and its decomposition has in many places produced a fine rich soil. This rock is however associated with tertiary strata, and is probably referable to a late epoch.
   (c.) Another example of greenstone occurred between Kesterlek and Edrenos, on the south side of the Rhyndacus. It appears in the midst of the schistose formation, and is accompanied with red and brown jasper. We however saw no sections which exhibited its connexion with the schistose rocks, but we are disposed to think that the jasper is an altered rock intervening between the greenstone and the schist.
   On the south side of the basin of Taushanli, above Karjitash, some trappean dykes were noticed in the schistose formation.
   § 3. Trachytic and newer Trap Rocks. (PI. III. Sec. 1, 4, 6, 9, and Sketch 10.)
   A remarkable feature in the geology of Asia Minor is the vast abundance of trachytic rocks, which have been erupted at detached points throughout the country. They appear generally to occur in the sides or bottoms of the valleys, and are frequently in contact with the tertiary formations.
   No instance occurred to us of rocks of this class, in the higher parts of the schistose mountain-chains. From this circumstance, we consider the trachytic rocks of the country to be all, or nearly all, of the tertiary period ; and it is probable, that their ejection was consequent on the breaking-up of the superficial crust by the elevation of the mountain-chains, at the close of the secondary period. Indeed, in some cases we have direct proof of the date of these eruptions by their having broken up, injected and altered the tertiary formations. It is remarkable, that in such cases the general horizontality of the tertiary strata remains undisturbed, the dislocations produced by the trachyte being confined to a few hundred yards around the focus of eruption. We may hence infer, how insignificant have been these volcanic operations in comparison with those forces, which could elevate the secondary formation into lofty mountain-chains.	.
   We proceed to enumerate the chief localities at which we noticed this class of rocks :
   (a.) On the north side of the lake of Apollonia, about three or four miles N.E. from the town of Abullionte (ancient Apollonia ad Rhyndacum), the hills consist of red porphyritic trachyte containing imbedded crystals of glassy felspar (lat. 40° 10').
   (6.) At Hammamli, near Kirmasli (lat. 39° 56', long. 28° 25'), is a mass of porphyritic trachyte of various colours. It forms an isolated hill not more than a mile in extent, rising in the midst of tertiary limestones.
   (c.) Around the village of Eshen (lat. 39° 43', long. 29° 20'), between Harmanjik and Taushanli, is an extensive patch of trappean rocks containing an abundance of iron ore, and occasionally traversed with veins of carbonate'of magnesia. On the north side of these igneous rocks, on the road to Harmanjik, a dyke of compact basalt, resembling greenstone, traverses lacustrine limestone containing Palu- dinse and Limnaese.
   Towards Taushanli these trappean rocks assume the character of a brown and grey trachyte, and form some considerable hills. They were probably erupted during the deposition of the tufaceous sandstones, which occupy the basin of Taushanli as before described (p. 16), the materials of which were probably ejected from the same craters in the state of ashes and cinders.
   0d.) In the valley of the Macestus are several outbursts of trachytic rocks. About two miles south of Susugherli a mass of compact porphyritic trachyte stretches down from the hills on the west; and half a mile further south, at Tashkapu, is a considerable extent of white volcanic tufa, dipping slightly to W.S.W., and forming a perpendicular cliff, around which the Macestus flows. Hills of red trachyte with glassy felspar occur a mile to the south of Kebsit, and again at Kalbourja, six miles further south. One of these hills, of a conical form, rises far above the rest; and on its south side is a deposit of stratified volcanic sand and conglomerate, dipping S.W. and resting upon trachyte. A mile further south is a very talcose rock resembling serpentine, much decomposed, and breaking with an irregular, lustrous surface. These rocks rise in the midst of tertiary, lacustrine limestone above described, which, on the south side of the trachyte, is much disturbed, and is sometimes almost vertical. About three miles north of Boghaditza the same limestone is again elevated and broken by the protrusion of a small mass of igneous rock resembling a fine-grained granite.
   The largest mass of trachytic rocks in the valley of the Macestus, commences on the south of Boghaditza (PI. III. Sec. 1), and extends thence to the foot of the Demirji chain. The northern part of this trachytic mass is of a greenish colour, resembling that of the Bosphorus*. It contains veins of chalcedony, and is accompanied with a trachytic conglomerate. In one place, a large mass of contorted, calcareous, thinly laminated marl is caught up in the conglomerate. Further south, this trachyte varies in colour from white to green and red, and is mixed with an angular conglomerate, which often presents a stratified appearance. On the east of Singerli is a mass of porphyritic trachyte, with crystals of white glassy felspar and hornblende in a reddish brown matrix; and it much resembles the trachyte of Smyrna. It flowed in a coulee from the hills to the S.E.
   The hot springs of Ilijah, described at p. 20, rise in these porphyritic rocks, which extend about eight or ten miles to the east of Singerli.
   (e.) On the south side of the ridge of schistose rocks, between Azani and Ghiediz (PI. III. Sec. 4), is an outburst of trachyte reposing on pumiceous sand and ashes.
Further down, on approaching Ghiediz, several masses of igneous rock jut out amidst the lacustrine limestone. The most remarkable case appears at Ghiediz. (PI. III., Sec. 4 and 9, Sketch 10.) This singularly situated town lies in a deep ravine, furrowed in the lacustrine limestone. On the lower side, the ravine is blocked up by a conical rock of compact and amygdaloidal basalt, containing green earth and augite, about 150 feet high, and riven to its base by a deep and gloomy fissure, the width of which, at the bottom, does not exceed two yards. This fissure affords an exit for the rivulet which descends the valley, and which would otherwise form a lake on the spot where the town stands.
   On the north side, this basaltic mass has sent forth a coule'e of columnar, amygdaloidal basalt about ten feet thick, resting conformably on beds of sand and gravel containing rolled pebbles of trachyte. (See Sec. 4 and 9.) This basaltic coule'e may belong to a more recent period.
   We regret, that our short stay at Ghiediz prevented our determining the relations of this volcanic mass to the surrounding lacustrine limestone. It is probably posterior to the lacustrine strata, for the latter contain no traces of volcanic matter. The beds of sand and gravel underlying the coule'e were perhaps a local alluvium of the same date as the great lacustrine formations.
   (f.) Trachytic rocks of Gunay (lat. 38° 53') (PI. III. fig. 4).—These rise in the midst of the hills of secondary sandstone between Ghiediz and Hushak, about eight miles south of the Hermus. On the east side of the village of Gunay are some singular varieties of volcanic opal or pitchstone ; and on the west is a well-defined coule'e of grey trachyte with large crystals of felspar, which has flowed from the focus of eruption above, down a small valley in the sandstone hills.
   (g.) Trachytic hills east of Takmak (lat. 38° 26', long. 29° 8').—This is a considerable cluster of abrupt conical hills standing at the western extremity of the plain of Hushak, and visible from the eastward at a great distance. We passed through them in going from Gobek to Takmak. This eruption of volcanic matter must have taken place anterior to the lacustrine formation of Hushak, for the gravel beds of that deposit, which abut against these hills on the east side, contain many boulders of trachyte mixed with pebbles of schistose rocks.
   The hills are chiefly composed of trachyte of various colours, occurring either en masse or in angular fragments imbedded in a tufaceous paste. About four miles west of Karadjd Achmet Kieui, is a patch of stratified marl, sandstone, and clay, enveloped and surrounded by the trachytic rocks. The beds are altered into the condition of quartz rock and Lydian stone.
   (h.) The Catacecaumene (lat. 28° 30').—The volcanic phsenomena from which this district derives its name, belong to a more recent epoch, and will be fully described in a subsequent part of this paper ; but there are also igneous rocks of a different character and older date, which require to be noticed here. They occur in the northern part of the basin, from eight to sixteen miles north of Selendi, on the road to Simaul (PI. III. Sec. 6), and consist of masses of trachytic rocks jutting out in the bottoms of the ravines, beneath the lacustrine formation. It was before stated (p. 18), that the lower portion of the lacustrine beds, in this part of the basin, consists of tufaceous deposits, which are doubtless connected in their origin with these trachytic eruptions. In some cases, the tufaceous beds have been broken up by the igneous rock ; but in the only instance (thirteen miles north of Selendi) where the superincumbent limestone was seen in contact with trap, its stratification remained undisturbed ; and therefore it is probable, that these eruptions were anterior to its deposition.
   Between the ninth and tenth miles from Selendi, the tufa rests upon protruded masses of decomposing syenitic trap with a nearly vertical cleavage, and half a mile lower down, at the junction of two valleys, is a mass of trachytic conglomerate, with a solid trappean nucleus. Igneous rocks again rise from beneath the tufa at the eighth mile from Selendi, and have assumed, in consequence of decomposition, a great variety of colours.
   (i.) About eight miles from Adala, on the road to Koola, is a small isolated hill of grey trachyte. It rises in the vale of Lydia, at the foot of the schistose mountains which form the north boundary of the valley of the Cogamus. A section, formed by a watercourse, shows that this trachyte is older than the platform of lacustrine gravel which reposes against it.
   (k.) Trachytic rocks of Smyrna.—These extensive masses of igneous matter, which break up and overlie the lacustrine deposits of the Smyrna basin, are described at length in a memoir specially devoted to the geology of that district. (Yol. v. pp. 396, 401.)
   (j.) Fouges, anc. Phoceea (lat. 38° 40').—Igneous rocks, which have assumed a great variety of character, porphyritic, trappean and trachytic, form the chief ingredient of the hills which rise to the north of the little harbour of Fouges. They are associated with, and overlaid by various beds of tufaceous and pumiceous sands, which have sometimes assumed the hard, semi-vitrified character of the trachytic rocks themselves, and from which they can be scarcely distinguished. These beds all dip towards the south, and sometimes contain numerous cavities, which are either filled or coated with mammellary concretions of chalcedony.
   (m.) Ritri, anc. Erythree (lat. 38° 18').—The Acropolis of Erythrae is situated upon an insulated peak of red trachyte, which rises abruptly to the height of twro or three hundred feet, and although perfectly crystalline like that in the neighbourhood of 
Smyrna, it has the appearance of being stratified, and dips to the north. In its range towards the north, the colour passes from red to grey : and the appearance of stratification is marked partly by colour and partly by cleavage.' The trachyte is in contact with the blue marble, which it has elevated and shattered.
  (n.) Boodroom, anc. Halicarnassus flat. 37°).—About five miles to the S.W. of Boodroom is a lofty conical hill called Chifoot Kaleh, or Jew’s Castle, nearly 1000 feet high, which rises directly from the sea. It consists of a reddish felspathic trachyte. The greater part of the promontory of Karabaghla, to the west of it, is composed of the same rock, as well as the islets of the coast. The hills between Chifoot Kaleh and Boodroom consist chiefly, if not entirely, of trachytic and pumiceous conglomerate, and horizontally stratified beds of volcanic sand, the contained fragments being generally angular, and varying in size and character.
§ 4. Modern Volcanic Rocks.
    The only part of Western Asia Minor where phaenomena strictly analogous to those of active volcanos are exhibited, is in that district of Lydia known anciently by the name of Catacecaumene, or the Burnt Country. We term these volcanic products modern, from the relation they bear to the other formations of the country ; but it is certain that, compared with human history, their antiquity must be very great. No record of the activity of these volcanos existed in the time of Strabo, who however rightly infers their igneous origin from the phenomena which they present. Indeed, these phenomena are so striking as to excite the attention of every beholder, and feed the superstition of the ignorant ; and we accordingly find, that the ancient inhabitants laid the scene of Typhon’s exploits in this region, while the modern Turks refer these mounds of cinders to the agency of Sheitan.
  The Catacecaumene is described in a previous part of this paper (p. 18), as a tertiary lacustrine basin, surrounded by hills of schistose rocks. It is drained by the Hermus, which escapes at Adala through a narrow gorge in the schistose formation, the closing of which to a sufficient height would again convert the upper country into a lake. Numerous volcanic eruptions have taken place among the older rocks, which formed the southern margin of the basin; and streams of lava, flowing from these foci, have overspread the lacustrine deposits.
   The outbursts of volcanic matter appear to be referable to three great periods. How long may have been their duration, or how long the intervals of repose between each, is buried in the tomb of time. All that we can now assert, is, that long intervals must have passed between each period of eruption; and that the latest eruption occurred antecedently to the commencement of traditional or authentic history.
   The oldest series of eruptions took place at a time, when the bed of the lake presented a nearly level and unbroken surface, and before the first commencement of the excavation of the present valleys ; for the basaltic rocks of that period invariably form the capping of the vast horizontal plateaux of tertiary lacustrine limestone. These eruptions could not have occurred long before the drainage of the lake ; for if they had, we should find sedimentary deposits overlying the volcanic rocks, which is not the case ; nor could they have occurred long after that event, for the valleys of denudation were not then formed. The eruptions of the second period were subsequent to the drainage of the lake, and to the excavation of deep ' valleys in the lacustrine deposits. Those of the third period are still more recent, and are distinguished by their entire identity of character with volcanos now in action. We will describe the localities and phsenomena of these three classes of volcanic rocks in the order of their antiquity.
  1 st period.—A mass of basalt of the first period caps the platform of lacustrine limestone on the north side of the Hermus for a distance of several miles, and may be seen in the distance in the sketch (PI. III. fig. 11). The greater part of it splits into irregularly wedge-shaped masses; but in a hollow on the south side, there is a fine section of columnar basalt, divided into two beds. In the lower, the columns are uniformly perpendicular ; but in the upper bed they diverge to each side with a slight curve, as seen in the accompanying wood-cut in the preceding page.
   This vast tabular mass of basalt is here above 100 feet thick, but in general it does not much exceed 50 feet. A bed of soft sand intervenes in some places between the limestone and the basalt, but the junction-beds are in general obscured by a talus of basaltic fragments.	?
   The summit of this basaltic plateau is about 800 feet above the bed of the Hermus, proving the vast amount of denudation which has taken place since the period of its eruption. The source from which the basalt has flowed is no longer apparent.
   On the S.W. of this plateau, and on the opposite side of the Hermus, is a small insulated hill of horizontal limestone, also capped by basalt at the same level. Its base is encircled by streams of lava of the 2nd and 3rd periods, which have flowed since the excavation of the valleys. The limestone at the base of the hill has undergone alteration, and is converted into a yellow jasperine substance with a bright, conchoidal fracture (PI. II.).
   About five miles east by south from Koola, close to the foot of the schistose hills which skirt the lacustrine basin, is a small plateau of imperfectly columnar basalt, which is referable to the 1st period. It is seen in the foreground of the sketch (PI. III. fig. 11). The lacustrine beds on which the basalt reposes, being near their junction with the older rocks, consist, in this place, of gravel and sand, derived from the schistose formation (PI. II. and PI. III., Sect. 8).
   On the south side of the Hermus, about five miles N.N.W. from Koola, is another large insulated plateau of basalt, reposing on the lacustrine formation (PI. II.).
   2nd period.—To the second period of volcanic action, we refer the numerous conical hills of scoriae and ashes, which cover the schistose ridges on the south of the lacustrine formation. The range of mica-schist and marble, which runs from east to west on the south of Koola*, sends off" three nearly parallel ridges towards the north, and may therefore be compared to the letter E. (PI. II.) The volcanic cones of the second period are scattered along this principal ridge and its three lateral branches, and many streams of lava may be traced flowing from them, and descending the valleys of denudation in the lacustrine formation towards the Hermus.
   The volcanic products of this period are distinguished by the smoothness of their outlines, and by the vegetation which clothes their surface. The cones of scoriae are all low and flat, rising at an angle of about 20°; their craters have either disappeared, or are marked by only small central depressions, and all their asperities seem to have been smoothed down by time. The scoriae which form them are sufficiently decomposed to admit of cultivation, and they are almost invariably covered with vineyards, producing the Catacecaumene wine, celebrated from the time of Strabo to the present day*. The streams of lava which have flowed from them, are level on the surface and covered with turf. The cones of this period are about thirty in number, and their position is indicated on the map (PI. II.). We proceed to describe some of the more important examples.
   On the most eastern of the three schistose ridges above-mentioned, are two conical hills of considerable magnitude, which are exhibited in the middle of the sketch, No. 11. (See also Section, No. 7.) Remains of a crater are very evident on one of these hills. A broad coulee of lava has flowed from each of them towards the north, and uniting has formed a plain about 200 feet above the Hermus, which has cut a passage through the northern extremity of the lava and the subjacent beds. This coulee is overlaid by a stream of lava of the third period, which will be afterwards described.
   A great number of volcanic cones rise on the top of the central schistose ridge on the west of the plain of Koola (Sketch 12, Sec. 7). Most of them have a slight crateriform depression on their summits. Two or three of these cones, which stand at the eastern foot of the ridge, are partly surroun’ded by lava of the third period, flowing from Karadewit; and the coule'es which descend from them towards the Hermus are overlaid in some places by lava of the same age.
   The most western of the three schistose ridges, near the village of Megne (Sect. 7), is also covered with mounds of scorise, most of them destitute of lava- streams ; but where these exist, they follow the slope of the country towards the north. On the eastern side of the ridge, near the summit, are some stratified beds of volcanic sand and ashes, sloping away from one of the cones.
   About six miles N.W. from Megne, on the north side of a table-land of lacustrine limestone, is a stream of basaltic lava, which descends nearly to the Hermus. Its lower part is black and vesicular, but it becomes redder and more scoriaceous higher up. The crater from which it has flowed is not apparent. (See Map, PL II.)
   3rd period.—The volcanic cones of both the second and third periods have been poured forth since the excavation of the valleys in the lacustrine formation; but their diversity, in point of age, is marked no less by the order of superposition than by the great difference in their state of preservation. The cones of the second period were described as being low and rounded in form, and covered with vegetation. Those of the third period, on the contrary, have all the features of volcanos now in action. They rise at an angle of 30° or 32°, and the ashes and scoriae which compose them, are so loose as to render the ascent laborious. A few straggling shrubs and plants are the only vegetation which they produce ; and the lava which has flowed from them, is as rugged and barren as the latest products of Etna or Vesuvius.
   The volcanos of this third period are only three in number, and are nearly equal in size (PI. II. and PI. III. Sec. 7). They stand in a nearly straight line from W. by N. to E. by S., and at the distance of about six miles from each other*. It is remarkable, that each of them rises in the centre of one of the small alluvial plains which alternate with the three schistose ridges before-described, therein differing from the cones of the second period, all of which stand upon or near those ridges. We will describe them in the order in which they stand in the Section, No. 7.
   The easternmost of these three cones is about a mile and a half N.N.E. of the town of Koola. Nothing can be more striking than the appearance of this town as viewed from the schistose ridge to the eastward. ''See PI. II., PI. III., sketch No. 12 ; also No. 11.) On the right of the sketch, No. 12, is the cone of scoriae and ashes, about 520 feet in height, denominated by the Turks Kara-dewit, or the “ Black inkstand.” An immense sea of black and rugged lava has flowed from its base, and spread over the surrounding plain. This eruption has formed a dam across the valley of Koola, and by stopping the natural drainage, has caused a marsh, which in wet weather is increased into a lake. To avoid the risk of inundation from this source, the town of Koola has been built upon the extremity of the lava-current, and is thus raised 15 or 20 feet above the plain.
   The cone of Karadewit consists of scoriae and ashes, principally of a reddish colour. On its north side is a small but very well-preserved crater ; and a vast number of small conical hillocks of scoriae have been thrown up amidst the lava which surrounds its northern base. The lava from this volcano flowed southward as far as Koola; but the larger portion of it descended in a northerly direction to the Hermus, which river has evidently been diverted from its course, and now makes a circuit round the north extremity of an overhanging cliff of lava nearly 50 feet high. The lava is vesicular and scoriaceous in the upper part, for about 6 or 7 feet. The next 20 feet are irregularly columnar, which structure gradually disappears in the lower part of the bed. The marls and limestones on the opposite or N.E. side of the river have been here much altered by their contact with the igneous rock, having been converted, in many places, into a yellow jasper-like substance, with a shining lustre and conchoidal fracture.
   This lava encircles the base of several cones of the second period, and overlies the older coulees which they have sent forth (PI. II.). In one place, 2^ miles N.N.E. from Karadewit, a narrow stream of lava has diverged to the east from the general mass, through a lateral valley in the schistose range, and has spread over the coulee from the easternmost cones of the second period before-described. The contrast between the lava-streams of the two periods is most striking.
   The second of these recent volcanic cones rises in the plain between Sandal and Megne*, and is also called Karadewit (PI. II. and PI. III., Sec. 7). This hill consists of scorise and ashes resting on a more solid crust of red scoriaceous rock. The crater is quite perfect, and from 150 to 200 feet deep, the bottom being choked with large stones which have rolled down its sides. Many considerable caverns and hollows exist in the scoriaceous rock. The summit consists of a very narrow ridge surrounding the crater. A few small pine-trees grow on the sides of this cone, which, on the whole, bears more vegetation than the Karadewit of Koola. A stream of lava has issued from the west foot of the cone, and flowed northwards for about five miles to the Hermus; and a small crater, about a mile to the west of the great one, has sent forth a narrow coulee which soon joins the general mass. There is also a low flat cone to the south-east, apparently belonging to the 2nd period, from the crater of which a small stream of lava, about half a mile in length, has been poured forth, apparently at the same time as the eruption from the large cone. This lava is remarkable from having flowed over the margin of the crater, instead of bursting through the sides, like all the other lava-streams in the district. This is probably owing to its having flowed from the crater of an older and therefore more consolidated cone ; whereas the recent cones, being formed of loose scoriae and ashes, and much higher, were unable to support the mass of heated lava until it should overflow at the summit, and therefore yielded at their bases a passage for the lava.
   The third or most western of the three great cones is called by the Turks Kaplan Alan. It is surrounded on all sides for more than a mile by the black and rugged lavas, which have flowed from its base, and render the approach laborious. The cone itself is more clothed with vegetation than either of the other two, though it does not yield to them in the steepness of its sides, and the general freshness of its appearance. It possesses a very perfect cratel*, between 300 and 400 feet deep, surrounded by a ridge only ten or twelve feet wide at the top, and about half a mile in circumference.
   On the north-west side of the great cone, a small one about half its height has been thrown up, with a regularly formed crater, but no lava appears to have flowed from it. On the west, several other small cones of scorise have been formed amongst the lava.
   The lava from Kaplan Alan has chiefly issued from the east side, whence, spreading round both flanks of the cone, the two streams again united, and flowed down the plain to the west for about three miles ; then turning south-west the stream descended a narrow valley for several miles, parallel to the Hermus, from which it is separated by a ridge of lacustrine limestone. At length, finding an opening into the valley of the Hermus, it followed the bed of that river along the narrow gorge in the schistose hills, whence, issuing at Adala, it spread for about a mile over the plain of Sardis, and at length terminated at the distance of at least thirteen miles from its source*. We were able to examine closely only the two extremities of this remarkable coulee, and we recommend the future geologist to follow its entire course from Kaplan Alan to Adala, as likely to afford him some interesting examples of the action of the river upon the lava.
   The appearance of this rugged mass of lava, issuing from a narrow gorge in the schistose hills, and spreading over the fertile plain at Adala, is very striking. Half a mile above the town is the remarkable scene exhibited in the sketch No. 13. It appears that the Hermus, when its course was first impeded by the lava, was compelled to flow over the top of the couUe, the cavities of which have here been filled by river-worn gravel, forming a stratum on the surface of the lava. In course of time, the river has effected a passage between the mica-schist and the lava, and has denuded both rocks to a great depth. It now flows at the base of a cliff of compact lava about eighty feet high, imperfectly columnar in its lower part and scoriaceous above. Higher up in the gorge, the river has cut a channel completely through the coule'e of lava, and changed its course from the right side to the left. Such are the effects which this river has produced in the lapse of ages. Yet so compact is the substance of the lava, that those parts of the coule'e, which have escaped the action of the running water, are as rugged and naked as the latest eruptions of Vesuvius, and exhibit not the slightest tendency to decomposition.
   It is evident from the phsenomena here exhibited, that however recent may be the appearance of the lava-stream, and of the cone from which it flowed, a very high antiquity must in reality be assigned to them. It is certain, from historical testimony, that no volcanic eruption has taken place in this country for at least thirty centuries, and how many more may have been required to enable the Hermus to denude the solid lava to the extent we now see, it is not easy to calculate. It would not indeed be fair to assume, that the whole of the present channel of the river between the lava and the mica-schist has been excavated to the depth of eighty feet since the flowing of the lava; for the rounded margin of a coulee commonly leaves a hollow between it and the pre-existing rock, which the river would naturally follow, and by undermining the columnar lava might produce a perpendicular cliff in less time than would at first sight be supposed. But when we find the river cutting across the coulde, and passing from one side of the lava to the other, we can assign no other satisfactory cause for this phaenomenon than the mechanical action of the river, operating during vast periods of time, and gradually wearing down its bed to its present level*.
   The freshness of appearance in the three great cones, the vast antiquity of which we have thus demonstrated, proves how small is the effect of atmospheric agency upon volcanic products, when unassisted by running water. Had these volcanos been ejected within the last ten years, the cones of scorise could hardly have been more perfect, the craters better defined, or the streams of lava more black, rugged and barren. Nor is this difficult to explain, when we remember, that the lava and scorise in this region seem to have scarcely any tendency to chemical decomposition, and that the rain which falls on the cones, being instantly absorbed by their porous soil, exerts no other mechanical force than the mere impact of the drops in falling.
   These considerations render it difficult to explain the marked difference of appearance between the volcanic products of the second and of the third periods, on the - mere assumption of a difference in their ages. It appears to us that a tenfold greater period of time, than has already elapsed since the ejection of the volcanos of the third period, would barely suffice to reduce them by atmospheric agency alone to the smooth and rounded forms presented by the cones of the second period; but if we suppose the latter to have been submerged beneath a body of water, either at the time of their ejection or subsequently, the explanation will be more easy. The action of water would soon obliterate all the sharp features of these mounds of ashes, and by filling up the cavities in the lava-streams with transported matter, would form that smooth and fertile surface which they now present. It is true that this explanation is not without its difficulties. The lake which existed here, before the basalt of the first period was poured forth, had long been drained, and deep valleys of denudation had been excavated in its bed, before the second period of volcanic eruption commenced. In order that the valley might be reoccupied with water to a sufficient elevation to cover the tops of the volcanic cones, the gorge at Adala would require to be blocked up to a height of perhaps 2000 feet, and the sojourn of this supposed mass of water must have been very transient, as we find no regular sedimentary deposits of any importance which can be assigned to it. Such a supposition involves an extensive flight into the region of conjecture, and many geologists would probably prefer explaining the wasted condition of these volcanic mounds, by means of ordinary atmospheric causes acting through an immense period of time.
  We have before alluded to the singular fact, that all the cones of the second period rise out of the ridge of schist and marble on the south of Koola, and its three lateral offsets (p. 29); while the three volcanos of more recent date occur in the plains which intervene between the several ridges (p. 31). This phaenomenon may perhaps be accounted for by supposing, that several cracks and fissures were produced in the schistose ridges at the time of their elevation, through which the igneous products at first found vent; that in process of time, lavas having been injected into all the fissures and become cooled, the whole mass was rendered more compact than it was before; and therefore that when, at a later period, volcanic forces were again in action, the points of least resistance would be in the plains which intervened between the consolidated ridges, where the new eruptions would consequently take place.
  It may be doubted whether the older series of eruptions supplied the forces which elevated the ridges themselves. The stratification of the latter is very irregular, and seems not to possess an anticlinal arrangement. Moreover, the undisturbed horizontality of the lacustrine beds in the vicinity, is scarcely compatible with any great subsequent disturbance of the schistose rocks.
  Mineralogy.—To the mineralogist the Catacecaumene presents rather a barren field. The scorite and lava are of ordinary character ; the latter contains olivine and augite, but no other crystalline minerals were observed.
  Thermal springs.—In a valley about a mile north of the Hermus, and six miles N.N.E. ofKoola, are some remarkably copious hot springs, rising in the lower beds of the lacustrine limestone. The water is perfectly tasteless, and forms no deposit or sediment whatever. The thermometer rose at the lowest spring to 123° Fahr. A short way to the east, in the centre of the ruins of an undetermined ancient city, are two other sources, at which the thermometer rose respectively to 133° and 137°. They rise out of a crevice in the calcareous tufa, and exhibit a slight development of sulphuretted hydrogen gas.
Comparison of the Catacecaumene with Auvergne.
   No well-informed geologist can fail to be struck with the numerous and remarkable analogies between the Catacecaumene and the volcanic district of Central France, so elaborately described by Messrs. Scrope, Lyell, Murchison, &c. We will here present, in a tabular form, a few of the chief points of resemblance between the two districts. Some of these analogies may perhaps be only accidental coincidences, but the majority of them afford instructive examples of the universality of Nature’s laws, whereby similar causes produce similar effects, even in the most distant regions.
Points of agreement between the Catacecaumene and Auvergne.

GENERAL CONCLUSION.
   It would be rash, without much more extended observations on other parts of Asia Minor not visited by us, to attempt any generalization or theory on the successive formations of the different groups and systems of rocks in the Western part of Asia Minor. Most of those which have occurred to us as safe, in the present imperfect state of our knowledge and the scarcity of organic remains, have been introduced into the foregoing pages. There are however a few remarks which result from the observations on the coast of Ionia and Caria, which we think may with propriety be noticed here.
   1. That the scaglia, or compact, white Alpine limestone, is more abundant in Rhodes and the southern parts of Asia Minor than in the northern or central districts of the peninsula. It is the same formation which constitutes the principal mass of the range of Mount Taurus, of which it may be considered as the western prolongation. Judging from the Nummulites found in it near Adalia, and at Dee- nair, near the source of the Meander, it appears to be the same group, which extends through the Morea into the Ionian Islands.
   2. The micaceous schist and saccharine marble, which are so extensively developed in the mountain-chains extending through the central parts of Asia Minor, as Mount Tmolus, Gallesus, Messogis, and along the coast of Ionia, gradually disappear towards the south, where they are replaced by the scaglia formation#.
   3. The igneous and volcanic rocks, which in the central and northern parts of Asia Minor are found almost universally distributed, become extremely rare towards the south.
   4. Trachytic or other igneous rocks are frequently found associated with the crystalline marbles, as at Erythrae and Boodroom, along the coast; and at Cyzicus and in the Catacecaumene, in the interior. But in the absence of organic remains, it is impossible to decide whether these marbles may not have had the same origin as the scaglia, and have been altered and crystallized by their proximity to the foci of igneous eruptions ; or whether the volcanic outbursts have not raised to the surface, formations of a former period, and from a greater depth, in the immediate neighbourhood of their elevation*.
   We will conclude this imperfect contribution to the geology of Western Asia Minor by comparing some of its more remarkable features with those portions of North-western Europe which have been most carefully explored. It will be seen that, notwithstanding the close analogy which we have shown to exist between some of the most recent geological phsenomena of these two portions of the world, yet on the whole the geology of Asia Minor is more remarkable for its contrast than for its resemblance to that of Northern Europe. These discrepancies do not indeed affect those general principles of the science, which, established on the inductions afforded by our own and the neighbouring countries, have since been found to prevail throughout the world. Thus, the crystallized condition of the older sedimentary rocks,—their elevation on either side of granitic axes,—the disruption and alteration of strata by igneous injections,—the parallelism of mountain- chains within limited districts,—the absence of organic remains in the older strata, —their gradual approach to existing forms as we descend the chronological scale, —even the want of continuity between the secondary and tertiary series of deposits,—all these phsenomena of Northern Europe find their counterpart in the region here described. But when we enter into greater detail, we shall find that Asia Minor, while it agrees in many respects with the geological types afforded by Greece, Italy, Spain, and the whole circuit of the Mediterranean as far as it is known, differs no less from those parts of Europe which lie to the north of the Alps and Pyrenees. For the sake of brevity and perspicuity we will recur to the tabular form in exhibiting these points of disagreement. 

   It may become a question for the speculative geologist, whether all these discrepancies may not be resolved into a mere difference in the dates at which a similar train of events occurred in both these regions. Thus, if we assume that a series of vast subterranean commotions, accompanied by the exhibition of intense heat, has taken place in both countries,—obliterating the organic remains in the lower strata, and indurating the substance of the upper ones, elevating mountain-chains and setting in action a long train of volcanic operations,—we have only to suppose that in Asia Minor this period of subterranean energy occurred at the close of the secondary epoch, and in Northern Europe at its commencement; and the chief geological differences between the two countries may perhaps be explained without much difficulty.

