INTRODUCTION.
IN several papers communicated to this Society, Mr. Strickland has described the geology of some of the portions of Asia Minor, through which we travelled together in the early part of 1836. When circumstances compelled that gentleman to return to England, I determined, notwithstanding the greatly diminished interest of solitary travelling, to remain in Asia Minor, and to endeavour to work out some of the principal objects which we had in view, when we quitted England. Two of the most important of these objects,—a minute examination of the geology of the Catacecaumene, and the ascent of Mount Argaeus, besides others of similar interest, I accomplished during the summer of 1837. I propose, therefore, in the following remarks, to give an account of the most eastern part of Asia Minor, which I then visited, and of Mount Argaeus, the summit of which had never been reached by any European traveller; but I much regret, that my observations were not nearly so perfect as they would have been with the assistance of Mr. Strickland, whose knowledge of various branches of Natural History had been of the greatest use during our previous journeys.
  In offering to the Society, the following account of the geology of that part of Cappadocia, which extends from the great Salt Lake of Kodj-hissar, eastwards as far as Caesarea and Mount Argaeus, I prefer describing the phenomena in the order in which they came under my observation, to giving a general notice of the geology of the country, because, not having traversed it in many directions, it is impossible for me to define exactly the limits of the different formations. I intend, also, to confine myself to a mere description of the facts really witnessed, leaving to others the task of drawing conclusions respecting the geological epochs, during which the events may be supposed to have taken place.
  I shall therefore describe, first, the country from the foot of Hassan Dagh, situated a few miles S.S.E. of Akserai, to the Salt Lake of Toozla or Kodj-hissar, as it is called in the country, a distance of about forty miles in a N.W. direction ; and, secondly, the country from the Salt Lake eastward to Caesarea, and the remarkable mountain of Argaeus, or Erjish Dagh, a distance of about 108 miles.
Description of Hassan Dagh and the country between that mountain and Kodj-hissar.
  The town of Akserai is situated in Lat. 38° 19' N., and a little to the eastward of the 34° of East Long., and near the eastern extremity of a wide, flat valley, which extends from Hassan Dagh to the Salt Lake. On the south, this valley is bounded by low undulating hills, formed of the horizontal calcareous lacustrine deposit, which occurs so extensively in the central part of Asia Minor, and which stretching away to the west, are gradually lost in the great plain, having an almost imperceptible dip towards the same point. The hills on the northern side of the valley, at the foot of which Akserai is situated, consist of alternating beds of red and yellow sandstone, conglomerate, sand, and marl. The pebbles contained in the conglomerate are chiefly greenstone, trap-rock, quartz, sandstone, and limestone. The strata dip slightly to the S.W., and are much worn into sharp ridges, narrow peaks, and deep ravines. To the east and north-east they are capped with a remarkable, horizontal rock, which I shall presently describe.
  Hassan Dagh is a peaked mountain, rising almost directly from the eastern termination of the great horizontal calcareous plain which stretches past Akserai to the south. Its height I estimated to be upwards of 8000 feet above the sea. When I was there (July 10th) much snow still lay in the ravines near the summit on the northern side. The mountain consists entirely of trachyte, and trachytic, and porphyritic conglomerates. (PI. XLVJII., Section 4.). Several volcanic cones, composed partly of trachytic conglomerate, and partly of scoriaceous matter, rise near its foot on the S.S.W. side, stretching away S.S.W. towards Karabunar and Karajah Dagh ; whilst many others of a similar character encircle its base to the N.W., extending towards Akserai. Those on the N. W. side are all in the present valley, and, with the exception of one which, although higher up the slope of Hassan Dagh, appears to belong to the same formation, are considerably below the horizontal beds of trachyte which cap the hills on the north side of the valley, and which stretch away N. and N.E., thereby proving their recent origin, which must have been subsequent to the scooping out of the valley between Hassan Dagh and the hills to the north. Prom one of these cones a very considerable stream of black vesicular lava has flowed for some distance into the plain towards Akserai, and encircled some of the smaller cones, which stand at a lower level. On the summit of several of these conical hills (or Puys), slight depressions are visible, but they are scarcely deep enough to justify their being called craters.
  The hills which form the northern boundary of this valley, are about 300 feet in height, and are capped, for some distance, with a white pumiceous rock, the stratification of which is either horizontal, or dips almost imperceptibly towards the north. The surface slightly undulates, and the edge or scarp of this table-land is much indented and broken. This pumiceous rock immediately overlies the red and yellow sands and sandstone conglomerates. Near the point A, in Section 4, I obtained the following section of the different beds in an ascending order, the whole thickness being about sixty feet.
   A. —A soft whitish yellow pumiceous peperite or volcanic sand, about eight feet thick. It decomposes and is easily washed into large caves and cavities, in consequence of which the superincumbent beds have fallen down, and large masses of them cover the S.W. side of the hill for some distance.
   B. —A similar rock, but much harder and more compact; about 12 feet thick. A very distinct line separates these beds.
   C. —A soft pumiceous sandstone resembling A. The upper portion of this bed differs considerably from the lower, apparently in consequence of its being overlaid by a rock which was probably deposited in a more incandescent state. The upper portion is full of long narrow nodules of a much harder rock, striking downwards from the surface of the bed, and varying much in length. They effervesce w’ith acids, and as the matrix does not contain calcareous matter, they were probably formed by the aggregation of the lime, in a manner similar to that which has produced sep- taria in other formations. The thickness of the bed is four or five feet.
   D. —A b,recciated rock, containing numerous angular fragments of coarse pumice stone. This and the two overlying beds have a closeness of grain and almost viscous and semicrystalline appearance, which renders it difficult to determine, whether they are due to volcanic sands which were deposited horizontally under water, or whether they are trachytic beds, closely resembling some of the domites of central France, which flowed from a subaqueous crater and were spread over the bottom of an ancient sea or lake.
   E. and F.—The lower of these beds is a soft, purplish white, trachytic rock, and passes upwards insensibly into F, which is harder and generally whiter. They both contain zeolites and crystals of olivine and hornblende, and apparently a few plates of mica.
  The cliff of this table-land presents, in many places, slight indications of perpendicular cleavage, but the lines are not sufficiently marked to warrant the rock being considered columnar. The slope of the hill below the cliff, towards the W. and S.W., is covered with enormous masses of the upper, harder beds, which have fallen in consequence of the crumbling of the softer sandstone below. They extend to some distance, and as many of them have been derived from the very centre of the mass, they show the real structure of the beds much better than specimens obtained from the summit of the hill, where the rock has been long exposed to atmospheric influences.
  A little to the east of Section 4, are very large fragments (in some places quite en masse) of the capping of the table-land, as if broken and let down by an earthquake or some great subsidence of the valley.
  Still further eastward, the valley is suddenly terminated by a hill, or mass of very coarse trachytic and porphyritic conglomerate, stretching across from Hassan Dagh to the north ; and it will be seen by Section 1, that the red and yellow sandstones and conglomerates repose upon this trachytic conglomerate, which, therefore, belongs to a much more ancient volcanic eruption than the white pumiceous capping just described. Notwithstanding the present apparently exhausted state of the great volcanic mountain Hassan Dagh, what a variety of epochs of activity, extending through a period the duration of which it is impossible to calculate, is laid open in the few preceding observations!
  lstly. We have the epoch when these huge trachytic bowlders were thrown out; and whether they were brought into their present situation by direct ejection from the crater, or were washed down by currents from the breakings up of pre-existing trachytes, they bear witness to very early volcanic operation as respects this part of the globe.
  2ndly. The epoch when the red and yellow sands and grits, and sandstone conglomerates, and marls were deposited upon these trachytic conglomerates, —a formation which, without attempting to fix its contemporaneity, I consider as nearly equivalent to our new red sandstone ; at all events it belongs to the saliferous deposits of AsiaMinor.
  3rdly. The epoch when the extensive volcanic capping of the table-lands was poured or showered forth from the neighbouring mountain. This makes the second period of volcanic activity. It is impossible to state the extent of this formation, which ranges solely towards the N. and N.E.; I believe it may be traced to the very foot of Mount Argaeus, although it cannot be supposed
that the whole of the volcanic matter has been derived from Hassan Dagli.
   4thly. The period when the valley between Hassan Dagh and the table-land was hollowed out; and
   5thly. The period (which is the third of volcanic activity) when the numerous cones at the foot of the mountain were produced, and from one of which a stream of black vesicular and scoriaceous lava has flowed. This is a period comparatively modern, and subsequent to the time when the surface of this portion of the earth had assumed its present configuration.
   Notwithstanding the constant melting of the snows on Hassan Dagh, I was surprised at not finding a single stream flowing down its side. At the head of the valley, however, a rapid rivulet rushes along a deep and broken ravine from the eastward, through the mass of trachytic conglomerate, which forms the termination of the valley of Akserai. This stream issues from a deep
and narrow lake situated amongst the low hills of trachytic conglomerate, close to the northern foot of the mountain, and is supplied from many copious springs which rise at the foot of the mountain, in the village of Khalvardere.
It would appear that, as the snow melts, the water is absorbed by the porous volcanic rocks, and percolating through them, emerges at the foot of the mountain in the beautiful springs of cold sparkling and filtered water.
   The hills of red and yellow sandstones and grits, which rise to the north of Akserai, and form the northern boundary of the valley, extend in a north-west direction to the shores of the Lake of Touzla or Kodj-hissar. A considerable river, called the Beas Su (White Water), issues from a deep gorge directly behind the town, and flowing W.N.W. through the plain, is ultimately lost in the flat saline marshes, which form the eastern boundary of the Salt Lake.
Owing to the nature of the country and the want of fresh water, it was impossible to examine these hills, as I might have done at a different season ; and the road through the plain is generally four or five miles from them.
They appeared to consist of the same formation the whole way. About twenty miles from Akserai, where they approach the lake, and between which and the hills the road passes along a narrow slip of low, half-cultivated land, I had an opportunity of more closely examining their structure.
   They consist principally of a brown sandstone conglomerate, dipping nearly south ; but several hard beds of conglomerate or grit, some of which contain much calcareous matter, are interstratified with softer beds of thinly laminated
sandstone, slighlty micaceous. In some places, the sandstone becomes yelowish, and contains a few bands of indurated shales, the whole of which evidently belong to the red sandstone formation. These beds all dip to the south nearly 80°. From this locality, as far as the village of Kodj-hissar, the same red and brown sandstones and grits continue on the east side of the road, approaching in some places close to the lake. Further to the eastward, beds of red and white marls and sand dip under the red sandstone.
  The small town or village of Kodj-hissar is situated at the western foot of this range of hills ; and a gently sloping alluvial plain extends westward as far as the Salt Lake, a distance of five miles (Sect. 7.). The water of this lake appears to be perfectly saturated. Fish cannot live in it, and if the wings of a bird touch it, they become instantly stiff and helpless from the saline incrustation ; every piece of dirt or wood which falls or is thrown into the lake, is likewise almost immediately coated with salt. I was unable to ascertain the exact dimensions of the lake, but I was informed by the natives, that it is about thirty hours or leagues in circumference. From the spot where I examined it, at A. on the map, a gulf about five miles wide extends sixteen or eighteen miles to the N.N. W.; and I understood that to the S.W., where the lake is broadest, the opposite shore is eight or nine hours or about twenty-four miles distant.
  The bottom of the lake is, in most places, a very deep, soft mud, incapable of supporting the slightest weight; but where I reached the shore, which is the spot whence Sultan Selim carried a causeway across the bay in an almost westerly direction, the bottom consists of a thick solid crust of salt, resting upon the soft mud. When I was there, the salt was covered with six or eight inches of water, but I understood that in another month it would be quite dry. I rode above a mile into the lake upon this salt crust, and nearly along the line of the ancient causeway, which is quite ruined. A few blocks of marble rising a little above the water, but thickly incrusted with salt, alone mark its direction. This passage is about half a mile in width. My guide pointed out a few holes in the salt through which a rider and his horse might sink into the deep mud beneath. I saw also a few smaller holes from which springs of water rose. They were probably fresh, as there is said to be a freshwater spring on one of the small islands, about 15 miles to the S.S.W.
  The same red and brown sandstones extend beyond Kodj-hissar to the W.N.W. (see Sec. 2.); but the inclination of the strata is there towards the N.W. or N.N.W., instead of the S. and S.W. This anticlinal dip is occasioned by a mass of fine-grained grey granite, which rises in the Castle Hill, immediately behind Kodj-hissar. (Sect. 3 and 7.) The granite penetrates the sandstone, sending forth veins or filaments, which gradually thin out. Further eastward, there appears to be a still greater mass of granite, also of posterior origin to the red sandstone.
   About a mile N.W. of Kodj-hissar and at the very edge of the plain, I found some detached portions of the horizontal white limestone, which forms the central plain of Asia Minor. They rest unconformably against the sloping sides of the sandstone, and in some places fill hollows in the rugged surfaces of the upturned edges, (Sect. 2 & 7.); in others they even cap the hills on each side of the valley which opens to the eastward, a short way to the north of the village. The hills immediately behind Kodj-hissar consist of brown and yellow sandstone, shale, and grit, some of the beds of which are extremely hard, while others are conglomeratic. The general dip is towards theN. W. 20°or25°, but in consequence of the protrusion of the granite, the beds are much disturbed; in one place, however, they were almost horizontal. The principal rock consists of a greyish brown grit, and soft brown laminated sandstone. Where it is in contact with the veins of granite, it is much hardened and slightly altered. In some of the upper sandstones of these hills, I found thin layers or bands of gravel and loose pebbles, amongst which were some resembling the grey granite just mentioned. It would, therefore, appear that all the granites of this district do not belong to the same period. On some of the sandy shales and lamellar sandstones, I observed slight impressions, like those of fucoid stems in the shales of the coal-measures, or the Alpine limestone near Trieste.
   Before leaving the district of the Salt Lake, I would mention the remarkable coincidence, that the extensive beds of rock salt on the borders of Pontus and Galatia, which have been quarried from the time of Strabo until the present day, occur in a precisely similar formation. I visited them in 1836, and found troughs or small basons of rock salt horizontally stratified, resting upon the perpendicular upturned edges of red and brown sandstone conglomerates. The strike of these vertical beds is from N.E. to S.W., and as far as I could judge they are situated directly N.E. from Kodj-hissar, and consequently the Salt Lake is in the direct prolongation of their strike. I have but little doubt, that the formation is continuous from one locality to the other, or almost half across this part of the peninsula of Asia Minor; and I was also told, that other mines of rock salt (Kaiya touz maden) occur in the intervening district.
   I will now describe the formations which I observed between the Salt Lake of Kodj-hissar and Caesarea, situated at the northern foot of the trachytic mountain of Argaeus.
A very gently rising alluvial plain extends from the Salt Lake almost to Kodjhissar. At the foot of the hills near that village, the horizontal beds of white limestone rest, as before described, unconformably upon the red and brown sandstones, and immediately to the eastward occurs the granite mass which, rising up through the sandstones, has produced the anticlinal dip of the strata. About three miles east of Kodj-hissar is an extensive table-land composed of the horizontal white limestone,but it is at a very much higher level than the beds at the village, and it rests upon brown sandstone and sandstone conglomerate, containing much selenite, which also occurs upon the surface or mixed up in the soil. Interstratified with the sandstone was a thick bed of milk-white fine-grained or compact gypsum. Hills of soft laminated sandstone, apparently of the same formation, continue, for some miles, to a range of high rugged mountains of grey granite resembling that of Kodj-hissar, and extending in a S.E. direction for nearly thirty miles. Before reaching these hills, the ground was covered for some way with boulders of the granite and a largegrained porphyritic trachyte, derived from some rugged hills to the north.

My road led along the northern slope of these granite mountains, and in the distance, to the north, I could clearly distinguish successive ranges of hills which, from their colour and stratification, evidently belong to the red sandstone formation. These granite hills are strikingly distinguished from those composed of trachytic rocks, by the numerous springs, which burst forth on their northern slope; but the water is soon absorbed by the sandy soil which covers the declivities of the hills, derived from the disintegrated granite.

Twelve miles from Kodj-hissar a trap or claystone porphyry dyke crosses the road, stretching nearly N.E. and S.W. or N.N.E. and S.S.W. The granite in contact with the dyke is reduced to a state resembling Kaolin. Several ridges of granite extend to the N.E. from the principal chain.

To the north-east of these hills is an extensive, alluvial plain, through which a stream flows, in wet weather, W.N.W. into the Salt Lake ; but the channel was dry, when I was there. After crossing this plain, the road leads along the N.E. side ofa gradually narrowing valley, which is bounded on the S.W. by the above-mentioned grey granite, and on the N.E. by trap and other igneous rocks. Near the commencement of the valley, I crossed an extensive, insulated table-land, composed of an horizontal bed of volcanic tuft‘ or peperite, capped by another of the same material but much harder. In the softer bed, numerous caverns have been excavated, leaving the hard stratum for a roof.

Descending again from this table-land into the valley, several protruding masses of greenstone or serpentine were observed in the line of section, and they are probably connected with the hills to ‘the N.E., which rise up to the north of Sarikaraman. Following the valley, we ,came again upon horizontal beds of tertiary limestone, but less pure than at the places before mentioned, and sometimes approaching to a nodular or concretionary structure. These beds rest against a red granite consisting of quartz and feldspar, which forms the termination of the valley, and stretching across from north to south connects the two ranges of igneous rocks, and may be said to mark the watershed between the Halys and the Salt Lake.

Beyond this granite are other protruding masses of trap and greenstone ; and further on, the ground slopes gently to Tatlar, and is covered with large angular fragments of basalt. At that village a deep ravine exhibits a good section of horizontal beds of light-coloured tulf, or pumiceous sand, of considerable dimensions, covered with a thick capping of black basalt, slightly and irregularly columnar, which forms an extensive table-land, stretching away far to the north and east. This basalt is very vesicular in places, and almost as rugged on the surface as a modern stream of lava. Itappears to have issued from one of the two lofty craters to the eastward, which are covered to a great height with loose scorias, cinders, and ashes. Other volcanic cones are visible to the south-east, from which streams of lava or basalt have also issued. Nor have all the igneous products of Tatlar been derived from one eruption. To the south-east of the village, and a little higher up the ravine, is a stream of lava, much more recent than that which forms the table-land to the east and north ofthe village; for it has not only flowed at a much lower level, but is seen in one place at the foot of the steep escarpment of the older basalt; its surface also is considerably rougher. It flowed in some places over the more ancient rock, and escaped through a narrow gorge or opening in the cliff into the plain below. This is visible a short way down the valley to the north of the village. Still the stream is so old, that the river has worn a way round it to the south-west, leaving a low cliff of tufi, also capped with basalt.

  Beyond this granite are other protruding masses of trap and greenstone ; and further on, the ground slopes gently to Tatlar, and is covered with large angular fragments of basalt. At that village a deep ravine exhibits a good section of horizontal beds of light-coloured tulf, or pumiceous sand, of considerable dimensions, covered with a thick capping of black basalt, slightly and irregularly columnar, which forms an extensive table-land, stretching away far to the north and east. This basalt is very vesicular in places, and almost as rugged on the surface as a modern stream of lava. It appears to have issued from one of the two lofty craters to the eastward, which are covered to a great height with loose scorias, cinders, and ashes. Other volcanic cones are visible to the south-east, from which streams of lava or basalt have also issued. Nor have all the igneous products of Tatlar been derived from one eruption. To the south-east of the village, and a little higher up the ravine, is a stream of lava, much more recent than that which forms the table-land to the east and north of the village; for it has not only flowed at a much lower level, but is seen in one place at the foot of the steep escarpment of the older basalt ; its surface also is considerably rougher. It flowed in some places over the more ancient rock, and escaped through a narrow gorge or opening in the cliff into the plain below. This is visible a short way down the valley to the north of the village. Still the stream is so old, that the river has worn a way round it to the south-west, leaving a low cliff of tuff, also capped with basalt.
  The other volcanic cones, to the south-east, have shallow circular depressions on the summit. In front of the most northern one, is said to be a small lake of brackish water; but no salt is obtained there.
  The salt mines of Hadji Bektash are stated to be nine miles to the N.N.W., and to be very deep. The hills, amongst which they are situated, consist apparently of red marl and sand ; and are beyond the several table-lands capped with basaltic plateaux, which extend four or five miles to the N. and N.N.E., and appear to belong to the same system as the basalt of Tatlar.
  In the ravine, near Tatlar, are a few of the remarkable conical hillocks which occur in great numbers further east, in the vicinity of Urgub. They form one of the most striking features of these valleys, which have been excavated in every direction in the volcanic pumiceous sand, to the depth of three or four hundred feet, by weathering- and the action of water.
   To the eastward of the volcanic cone, whence the basalt of Tatlar flowed, another table-land of cellular basalt extends about a mile, to the deep ravine of Alajahscheher, the castle of which stands upon the edge of the basaltic cliff. The basalt on the west side of the ravine overlies the horizontal pumiceous tuff, which differs from that of Tatlar only in being of a pinker colour, and in consisting almost entirely of pumice, but containing, in some of the beds, numerous small fragments of black obsidian.
   Thick beds of this tufaceous deposit, varying in hardness, continue, with occasional exceptions, almost the whole way to the foot of Mount Argaeus. But the compactness or hardness of the beds increases considerably near the trachytic base of that mountain, from which they are separated by a narrow and irregular plain or valley.
   A few miles to the eastward of Alajahscheher, and before reaching Nemb- scheher, a mass of red trachytic rock rises to a considerable height through the pumiceous tuff, which appears to have been quietly deposited against it, as the tuff presents no trace of having been upheaved from its original horizontality.
   A short distance from Nembscheher, a deep ravine exhibits a section of red and yellow marls underlying the pumiceous deposit, and dipping considerably to the south-east. The marls contain many veins and masses of white fibrous gypsum, the whole of which must have been disturbed previously to the accumulation of the tuff. I have already mentioned that selenite occurs in the red sandstone and marls near Kodj-hissar, to which formation these marls ought also to be referred, as well as the red sands beyond the volcanic table-lands to the north. In a deep ravine to the north of Nembscheher several beds of basalt, alternate with the tuff, and were probably derived from some high hills to the south. Basalt also occurs in the bed of the torrent which flows down from these mountains, on the east side of the town.
 The same tufaceous rock, in horizontal beds, extends from Nembscheher to Urgubj at which place, and at Utch-hissar, half-way between the two, it has been excavated into deep valleys, by weathering and the agency of two small streams. From the unequal manner in which the rock has been acted upon, the most extraordinary phenomena have been produced. From the edge of the plateau of Utch-hissar (PI. XLVIII., fig. 5.) we looked down upon a deep valley,in places three or four miles wide,and filled for several miles up and down, with an infinite number and variety of sugar-loaved cones, from 150 to 300 feet high, and for the greater part perfectly isolated from the sloping sides of the valley, but generally connected with each other at the base. Many of them have been excavated, and have served either as tombs to the ancient Greeks, or as chapels to the Greeks of the Byzantine empire. They are now used for dove-cotes by the Turks and Greeks.
  In some places these cones occur on the sides of the hills, and present every variety of size, gradually increasing in height, from the first embryo near the summit, until, in the valley below, they stand out by themselves in full perfection and independence. At Utch-hissar the beds incline very slightly towards the north-east, and consequently the cones, which generally occur in the same beds, have a much lower level in that direction than at Utch-hissar itself. Looking down upon them from near the village, or at the distance of two or three miles, they appear so slender, and are packed so close together, that they resemble rather a forest of lofty cypresses than what they really are.
  At Urgub, I observed a peculiarity in some of the cones, which I had not noticed at Utch-hissar. At that place many of them are capped by a large mass of a much harder stone, projecting like the head of a mushroom, the protecting influence of which has no doubt preserved the subjacent conical mass from the action of the weather. Although the mode of formation is not so apparent amongst the cones of Utch-hissar,there can be no doubt that they are also owing to some similar cause; and that the existence of a hard mass of pumice, or other extraneous substance in the tulf, resisted the wearing influence of running water or of rain, when the surrounding matter was washed away.
  About thirty miles S.S.E. from Urgub, where the same tufaceous formation occurs, I observed, on the sloping side of a hill, numerous large blocks of peperite, which had fallen down from a much harder bed forming the capping of the hills. Wherever these blocks had rested upon the softer beds, they had protected the ground beneath them from the gradual wasting away to which the rest of the hill-side was constantly exposed; and under each of them might be seen the embryo commencement of a similar cone, varying from one to ten feet in height. They almost covered the face of the hill.
  The beds near Urgub differ in hardness and tenacity, and in colour from pale yellow to white and very pale pink ; but in one bed, the lapilli imbedded in it, were mostly coated by a black substance. In other places, the surfaces of the separate laminae of the beds were covered with the same black substance. The extent of this pumiceous deposit from north to south is very considerable, particularly towards the south, in which direction, from the heights near Urgub, I observed it extending in regular plateaux or table-lands to a great distance.
  A few miles to the eastward of Urgub, a considerable mass of trap or basalt projects on the south side of the ravine, whilst on the north, the hills consist of indurated shales. Between the latter and the basalt, a stream has worn a deep passage, and a little further on, it flows over basaltic rocks, apparently inter- stratified with beds of coarse peperite, which dip S.E. about 40°. These volcanic strata are probably connected with the mass of basalt just mentioned, which appears to have been elevated through the red sandstone and marls. Large boulders and masses of jasper and flint and quartz resinite occur in many places in the valley, apparently derived from the beds of jasper and limestone on its north side; but I did not see any beds or nodules of flint in situ. These beds of jasper and limestone, which may perhaps be referred to the cretaceous period, or upper secondary formation, dip to the E.S.E. 20° or 30°. Beyond, we came again upon the horizontal tufaceous formation of which the hills consist, both right and left, as we ascended the ravine. Near Baktash the road and line of section leave the valley on the right, and wind up hills to the north, which in places have perpendicular escarpments forty or fifty feet high. On reaching the capping of hard tuff", which had been seen from below, I was surprised to find that the ground still rose gently to another plateau half a mile distant, formed by a thick bed of basalt, derived apparently from some high hills, a few miles to the E.S.E. The extent of this capping is not very considerable, but the ground to a great distance is covered with its broken fragments, caused by the gradual wearing away of the softer tuff1 beneath it.
   Descending towards Injesu, which is situated on the same formation, the tuff becomes very hard, and separates easily into flags two or three inches thick. In a ravine S.W. from the town, is a junction of the hard trachytic tuff with the underlying red and yellow variegated sands and marls. The last near the surface are slightly indurated, and traversed by vertical fissures for a foot or two downwards. I could not ascertain their dip, and they appeared, as far as I could see, to be perfectly uniform, though variegated in colour, and to form only one bed, without separation, way-board, or intervening band of harder stone. Near the surface, however, the deposit contained a few pebbles and small boulders of volcanic rocks.
Mount Jrgceus and surrounding District.
   From Injesu, the tufaceous formation continues for several miles, to the plain of Caesarea. The vast insulated peak of Mount Argaeus rises from that plain and sends out several prolongations and spurs to the north into the open country between Injesu and Caesarea.
   I call Mount Argaeus insulated, because, although to the east its base is connected with another range of mountains, it rises on the north, the west and south sides, perfectly free, from a vast level plain. On the west, indeed, the plain is narrow,as the mountain is separated from the hills of Injesu only by a flat valley one or two miles wide, down which a small stream flows in the winter, into the lake in the plain of Cmsarea. As I did not proceed up this valley, I cannot affirm that it is continuous the whole way to the plain of Kara-hissar, which is to the south of Mount Argaeus ; but I believe it to be so.
  A short way from the first ridge of hills, which stretches down from Mount Argaeus, the plain is covered with a thin saline efflorescence, apparently muriate of soda. This ridge, which is narrow and rugged, consists of compact black basalt, evidently one of the most recent coulees which have burst forth from the sides of the mountain. Between the ridge and the next mass of rock, a porphyritic and feldspathic trachyte, numerous springs of water rise and flow north into the plain. They are derived from the partial melting of the perpetual snows and glaciers on the summit of the mountain, the water having percolated through the porous rock.
  The remaining formations, which the section crosses as far as Caesarea, are trachytic, more or less compact, and more or less conchoidal in fracture. They vary in colour from dark gray to brown and dark red, and contain numerous imbedded masses of carbonate of lime. Near the summit of Yelanli Dagh, a little off the line of section, is a very deep and rocky crater, near the summit of a ridge, in many parts almost perpendicular. Towards the north-east, the sides of the crater have been broken away; but no trace of a lava stream can be seen extending from them.
  Caesarea is situated in the plain, at the foot of the lower hills, which slope down to the North from Mount Argaeus. The diluvial soil near the town is much impregnated with nitre, which is worked and sent to Constantinople for the manufacture of gunpowder.
  The plain extends from E.N.E. to W.S.W., and the hills which form the southern boundary consist for eight or ten miles N.E. from Caesarea, entirely of hard, tufaceous rock.
  Section 6 represents the hills at a spot nine or ten miles W.N.W. from Caesarea, where the Karasu or Melas flows out of the plain of Caesarea to the N.W., through a narrow gorge, into the Kizil Irmak orHalys. This section bears a great resemblance to the formations to the south, through which the general section passes, and consists of beds of white and yellow tuff or pepe- rite, filling hollows and valleys in the pre-existing trachyte, some of the tuff being also capped with basalt. Lower down and near the river are a few horizontal beds of white limestone, which are probably of a much more recent origin, as they appear to rest against and overlie the tuff, although conforinably stratified. Lower down the valley, to the N.W., red and yellow marls underlie a white stratified rock, which is probably the white tuff mentioned before. This is another point of resemblance between the two localities, and it is probable, that, as in the neighbourhood of Akserai and Kodjhissar, the red sandstone formation extends under this vast tufaceous rock throughout its whole extent. The most surprising and inexplicable feature in this phaeno^ menon is the occurrence of horizontal tertiary and volcanic beds over so vast an extent of country, at the height of 4000 feet and upwards above the sea. What a mighty effort of elevation must we not suppose, capable of raising a tract of land above 200 miles in length to this great height, without anywhere disturbing the horizontality of the stratification !
  About eleven miles due south of Caesarea is the lofty summit of Argseus, rising like Hassan Dagh to a single peak, and bearing in its general appearance a great resemblance to the still more lofty peak of Ararat, which I had seen the preceding year. The summit of this mountain consists of a reddish brecciated and scoriaceous conglomerate, full of fragments of trap and porphyritic trachyte, and is nearly the point of junction of two enormous broken craters, one of which opens to the N.E., the other to the N.W., and the steep sides of which, to the north, are covered with perpetual snow for 2000 or 3000 feet below the summit. On the southern slopes the snow is not so deep, and except for the last 1000 feet, lies in the deep ravines only, and not upon the intervening ridges.
  The height of Mount Argreus has hitherto been much underrated. Kin- neir Macdonald guessed it to be only 8000 feet above the sea. The plain of Caesarea is, by rough calculation of the barometer, at least 4200 feet above that level; and according to the three following observations, I consider that the summit of the mountain cannot be less than 13,000 feet above the sea.

  A little below the summit on the S.E. side, rugged serrated ridges rise through the snow ; consisting of a compact trachytic rock with a conchoidal fracture, resembling greenstone or hornstone. Other ridges are composed of trachytes of different colours and textures. Near the foot of the great cone several smaller ones of pumice and lapilli rise, encircling its base on the S.E. side, whilst to the west and north are many more, from some of which streams of basalt or lava may be traced; but I was unable to examine the whole of the mountain. Some of the cones of pumice on the south side have also deep depressions or craters partly broken away, and are clearly the most recent proofs of igneous agency on this side of the mountain. On the southern flank I also observed, near the base, as I had before observed on the northern flank, several traces of streams of black basalt, which had flowed into the plain from near the foot of the mountain, and appear to have been partly buried by the gradual increase of soil brought down from the different mountains, and which, as there still appears to be no outlet for the waters, has a slow but gradual tendency to fill up and raise the level of the plain.
   In concluding these remarks, I must express my regret, that the barrenness of the subject is increased by the general absence of organic remains from the great sedimentary formations of these tracts, and the consequent impossibility of referring the deposits to those of Europe, or to fix even an approximate scale of contemporaneity between them. In the red sandstone, I have never found the slightest trace of fossils, and but rarely in the white calcareous beds. In the neighbourhood of Sevri-hissar, W.S.W. of Angora, I discovered some beds which were near the top of this calcareous series, and were full of Limneae and Planorbes, whence I conclude that it is a freshwater lacustrine formation.
   Although the region offers evidence of volcanic action at many different periods, yet the igneous rocks are so rarely associated with stratified deposits, that it is almost impossible to ascertain, with any degree of precision, the geological era during which these events may have taken place. Nevertheless, we can clearly distinguish two widely separated groups of stratified rocks, and we have evidence of great volcanic activity between the two periods of their accumulation. The first or lower is the red sandstone, which is always connected with the salt districts of Asia Minor, and may, by analogy, be considered to be a secondary formation; and the second or upper is the horizontal white limestone, which, notwithstanding the violent convulsions to which most parts of this country have been exposed at various periods, has, with scarcely one exception, never been removed from its horizontality, and may be considered as a tertiary formation.

