
SINCE the reading of my first communication on this subject, another fossil tree, about three feet in length and three feet in circumference, has been found on the opposite side of the railway. It stands on the same thin stratum of coal as the others, and, like them, it is perpendicular to this stratum. This additional fossil tends greatly to confirm the view already taken, that the trees now stand on the precise spot where they grew. If there be some difficulty in conceiving that one detached and erratic tree could be placed and left quite perpendicular on the surface of an ancient formation, there is vastly greater difficulty (in my mind almost an insuperable one) in conceiving this condition to belong to six trees, all within a few yards of each other. But even of the precise position in which they stand, no written account can convey a conviction as to their being in situ, at all equal to that which forces itself on the mind from a single glance at the fossils themselves; and for precisely the same reason, that a mere statement of five or six broken stems of trees standing in the middle of a green field, would convey nothing like the certainty of their having formerly grown there, that would be derived from one glance at the objects themselves. As far as I am aware, not one of the many geologists who have inspected these fossils has felt a moment’s hesitation in considering them to be now on the same spot where they grew. This point being as I conceive settled, I will proceed to add a few particulars and observations which appear to me to be applicable in some degree to these and similar fossils.
  In the tropical parts of South America, I have observed several instances of trees which had been cut down or broken off near the ground, becoming hollow by the rapid decay of the wood ; little more being left than an outer shell, consisting chiefly of the bark, which had resisted decay better than the wood. The cases to which I refer, were of dicotyledonous trees, having a proper bark; and 1 have noticed this peculiarity more frequently in trees of that class than in Monocotyledons, excluding of course the bamboos, canes, etc., which are always hollow. For instance, in the Palm tribe, which near the coast is frequently interspersed with forest trees, I do not remember to have met with an instance. The rind or outer covering of this magnificent class of plants is of considerable thickness, and has generally a density and a structure which seem to defy decay; while the interior or pithy part possesses antiseptic qualities whereby it is enabled to resist decomposition much longer than the interior or proper wood of many of the tropical forest trees growing in low and moist situations.
   Sometimes the portion remaining in the ground of these dicotyledonous trees, including the strong roots and a short piece of the stem, presented very much the appearance of the founder’s mould when he has withdrawn the pattern from the sand, before the metal is run in to form the cast. By this kind of decay a cavity was left, from which might have been taken a fac simile of the lower portion of the tree, with the strong, diverging roots; and in nearly all cases, this cavity was lined with the whole or with remnants of the bark. Deceived by their outward appearance, I have stepped upon similar trees which were prostrated on the ground, and which, unable to resist the pressure, gave way beneath my feet, and allowed me to sink into what was apparently a massive tree, but which in reality was only a hollow cylinder.
   So often do these decayed stems occur in the low and hot forests of the coast of South America, that dangerous accidents frequently happen in consequence. Many of the rude and temporary bridges which had been thrown over narrow streams and ravines by Englishmen, who wanted the leisure or the knowledge to select a proper material, have often suddenly given way, though they had been erected perhaps only twelve months. Formed of trunks of trees, the outward appearance afforded no sign of the inward decay; and the first notice the unwary traveller had of the instability of the bridge, was, his being precipitated into the stream below. The bark of these trees had changed but little, while of the interior nothing was left except dust and a few decayed remnants, which crumbled beneath the lightest touch.
   The forests in which I have observed these appearances are in Venezuela, on the shore of the Carribean Sea, between the eighth and tenth degrees of north latitude, and the sixty-fifth and seventieth degrees of west longitude. The only analogous appearances we have in this country, are produced by the dry-rot, which sometimes destroys the interior of timber with great rapidity, leaving an exterior crust; but these appearances are neither so frequent nor so striking. In the tropical forest a few months suffices to destroy the interior of the largest tree, by a process which, instead of being of a vegetative nature, as the dry-rot is in this country, appeared to be of a fermentative character commenced in the juices of the tree, and which dissipated in volatile gases that which just before had presented a solid form. The great heat and excessive moisture of these forests appear well calculated to hasten such processes ; and in a manner which persons who have always lived in more northern climes can scarcely conceive of;—whether these processes originate in chemical action, or in the growth of fungi, or in both combined.
   Cases of this kind were met with most frequently in the low and flat lands, which are equally adapted to the growth of the tallest forest trees and the most majestic palms, and where, from the deep wet soil and excessive moisture, all the subordinate vegetation consisted of canes, bamboos, and minor palms. Such tracts would be most easily submerged, and are most analogous in character to our coal- basins. The filling-up or undergrowth of these districts being soft and green, it would be less likely to leave permanent traces of its existence behind. The palms would form but a small proportion of the whole, and a large number of the forest trees rendered tender and friable by rapid decay would be dissipated and lost in the surrounding nucleus, leaving little more than specks of carbonaceous matter, to tell of their former existence. Supposing the vegetable covering of the spot on which the forests grew, was thick enough to form that which to future ages would be a seam of coal, the decayed trees would be incorporated and mixed up with the mass of vegetable matter, mingling like the dust of former generations with their kindred dust around. These observations may perhaps somewhat elucidate why so few distinct fossil remains of a large size are found in our coal-measures, and the absence of which has not unfrequently struck me as peculiar, considering the myriads of forest trees which must have constituted part of the vegetable kingdom at the time of the formation of our coal-deposits. The fossil trunks of trees are comparatively rare. Calamites, if they resembled the canes or reeds of tropical forests, from their harder texture, might be expected to have more frequently left the traces of their forms behind ; but if they belonged, as seems likely, to another class of plants of a softer structure, the question again arises, why are they more numerous than the fossil remains of trees ? Giving full force to what I have stated as to the rapid decay of many forest trees in tropical climates, it may yet be remarked, if coal is to be looked upon as the debris of a forest, we ought to find more numerous traces of trunks of trees in our coal-basins. The difficulty is a great one, and it is only perhaps by allowing the original of our coal-seams to have been a combination of vegetable matter analogous to peat, that the difficulty can be solved. Few trees would grow in these situations ; and we might expect to find them, as we do find them, few in number, and isolated in position. The Flora of our coal-formations would then be representatives of almost naked mosses ; and the remains of vegetable forms we most frequently find would only, as has been already advanced by Professor Lindley, be confirmative of the 
antiseptic qualities of their original nature, not of the number or importance of their particular genera, at the time of their deposit.
  Whatever opinion maybe drawn from that which is conjectured in the foregoing statements, there is one conclusion that will be obvious; viz. that though fossil remains may be found filled with a mechanical deposit, and containing traces of other vegetables, yet this condition does not prove that the stems were formerly hollow, nor even render it the most likely hypothesis ; for they may have been what are usually termed hard wood trees, notwithstanding this circumstance.
   


