THE fossil trees, to which the following observations refer, were found at Dixon Fold, Clifton, near Manchester, in making the excavations for the Manchester and Bolton Railway. The largest of these fossils, No. 1. (see PI. XVII.), was discovered about two years since (1837); and the others have been met with during the last three months, in excavating below the level of the rails to form a drain. No. 1. may have been taller than it now is, for being of a friable nature, a portion of its upper end might easily have been removed by the workmen before they discovered what it was. This observation is still more applicable to the others, as they are further within the line of railway, and the earth above them was removed in larger masses ; but though they may have been shortened by this means, it is not probable that the imbedded remains of the original stems could have been more than a few feet longer than at present.
  The section (fig. 6.) showing the stratification above the fossils, is in the direction of the line of railway, or from south-east to north-west; but the dip of the strata being nearly due south, at an angle of about fifteen degrees, the section passes obliquely across the dip. The dotted horizontal line is very nearly coincident with that of the rails.
  The small bed of coal, the “ two-feet mine” beneath which these fossils stand, occupies an intermediate place in the coal-field of the district. There are above the two-feet mine, in a thickness of about 130 yards, four other “ mines” of coal, of an aggregate thickness of sixteen feet. The next subjacent coal-bed is forty-five yards below the two-feet mine. It consists of cannel coal,
   

and is so irregular in dimensions, as to vary within a space of 600 yards from three to thirteen feet in thickness. Below the cannel are five or six other beds, all of which are worked within a few miles, so much does this part of the country seem to have been affected by physical derangement.
   The five fossils are nearly in a straight line, and being parallel to the direction of the railway, they stand obliquely across the dip of the strata. In the direction of the section, a line drawn through the roots of the trees is conformable to the inclination of the strata; and in the direction of the true dip, this is still more plainly the case, the large spreading roots of No. 2. and No. 5. being quite conformable to the inclination of the stratum on which they rest; and the roots of the others are equally so to the extent to which they are seen, but being less exposed, they are not so striking in this respect. The whole of the stems stand very nearly at right angles to the plane of stratification. They are chiefly imbedded in a soft argillaceous blue shale, but that which surrounds the upper end of No. 1. is of a more siliceous nature. In the same plane as the roots, a thin stratum of coal has been found as far as the excavations have extended.
   A still more remarkable circumstance is the great abundance of the Lepidostrobus variabilis about the level of the roots; for in the small excavations made around each tree, and just in the covering of the roots, more than a bushel of these fossils was found, chiefly in single specimens, forming the centre or nucleus of ovate nodules of bluish argillaceous shale. These specimens forwarded to the Society have been examined by Mr. Morris, who fully agrees in the above determination.
   The whole of the fossil trees had a coating of coal, varying in thickness from a quarter to three-quarters of an inch ; but generally it was so soft and friable, that, in removing the shale from around the trees, it crumbled off. The fossils consequently now appear to be almost decorticated ; but the existence of the coaly envelope proves that they retained their bark wholly or in part when they were enclosed by their present matrix. Near the root of No. 5. a portion of this coal, about three-quarters of an inch thick, remains strong and firm. Its surface is marked slightly with longitudinal flutings, but they are very irregular in distance and direction.
   The whole of the decorticated surface of the fossils has similar markings, the depression of the flutings being generally less than a quarter of an inch, and the intervening spaces about two inches broad ; but there is considerable irregularity in this respect, and nearer the roots the slight furrows almost disappear. In several places, the surface of the cast of the trunk, and which evidently corresponds to that beneath the bark of the trees, bears distinct impressions of the woody fibre. This fibrous appearance is not generally longitudinal and parallel, but waving and irregular ; resembling the peeled surface of our hard-wooded forest-trees.

   The largest of these fossils is about fifteen feet in circumference at its base, and seven and a half feet at its top, and is eleven feet high. The next in size (No. 5. of PL XVII.) is less conical in shape, and measures seven and a half feet in circumference, and is six feet in height.
   The fossil No. 2. has a shorter trunk; but is nine feet in circumference and two and a half feet in height. It has three large spreading roots which are nearly four feet in circumference at their commencement, and which, after extending six feet from the trunk, separate into eight arms or roots. The other two fossils (Nos. 3, 4.) are of smaller size, being three feet and five feet in height respectively, and six feet in circumference ; and their roots seem to extend but a short way into the soft shale and coaly matter. The roots of No. 5, as far as exposed, are solid and strong and four feet in circumference, and being quite unbroken, they have every appearance of being prolonged to a considerable distance from the trunk of the tree. There is no reason for supposing that the roots of No. 1. are not equally spreading, but the position of both these fossils rendered it difficult to follow them further. None of the drawings show the roots so perfectly as they are seen in situ; for all the fossils, except No. 1, being considerably below the level of the rails, and standing in deep holes, the artist in drawing them had to take a bird’s eye view, which rendered it difficult to delineate them perfectly.
   The description which I. have given of the appearance of the fossils and their situation, will, I hope, with the assistance of the drawings, be understood ; it therefore only remains to add a few general observations.
   I have already mentioned, that the roots of the trees were covered with a thin stratum of coal: by excavating on the opposite side of the railway, I found that this seam (eight to ten inches thick) extended under the railway, and to a distance therefore of ten yards at least from the trees ; and it is likely that it ranges much further. It probably represents what was formerly the vegetable covering of the spot on which the trees stand. It is true, that the fact of the trees having been found erect, would not prove that they grew there; but that they now stand, (broken and fossilized,) on the very spot where they once flourished, is rendered exceedingly likely by the circumstance of all of them being perpendicular to the stratum on which they rest. Having, during a residence in South American forests, been accustomed to see trees torn by the roots and carried to and fro, I find it difficult to conceive that, even once in ten times, a tree so transported and replanted (if I may use the expression) in another place would be left quite in a perpendicular position. There is, perhaps scarcely ever, in trees of large girth, such a preponderance of weight in the roots as to ensure more than obliquity of position in deposition after such a removal ; for the earth torn up with the roots is soon washed off; and that five trees near together should all have been thus placed quite

perpendicularly, would be a much more marvellous thing than that they once grew where they now stand.
   Admitting them to have lived where they have been discovered, and considering as a general rule that trees grow perpendicularly to the horizon, these fossils would indicate, that the strata of the coal formation on which they rest, were formerly in a plane parallel to that of the horizon, and have since been inclined to the angle at which they now lie.	.
   With regard to the species of the trees, there is a difficulty in deciding upon it. The friable and disintegrated state of the coaly envelope gave little or no clue to the external markings of the bark. The great size of the stems and the appearance of flutings would lead to the belief that they are specimens of the Sigillaria pachyderma ; but this opinion depends chiefly on the flutings for its support, and they are perhaps too indistinct and irregular to be very decisive evidence.
   Could the fossils be shown to be specimens of Lepidodendron Sternbergii, it would be an interesting fact, in conjunction with the circumstance of the ground around them being strewed with fossil specimens of Lepidostrobus variabilis, which M. Adolphe Brongniart was of opinion belonged, as organs of fructification, to a Lepidodendron. How far the absence of the rhomboidal scars in the lower part of specimens of so great dimensions should weigh against such a supposition, is for more competent fossil botanists than myself to determine.

