
INTRODUCTION.
GEOLOGISTS have long recognized the fact of the approximate parallelism of lines of dislocation in those districts in which systems of such lines are found to exist; and in my memoir on Physical Geology, published in vol. vi. part 1. of the Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, I have shown that such parallelism would, in many cases and under the most simple and probable conditions, be the necessary consequence of the simultaneous action of an elevating- force acting beneath extensive portions of the crust of the globe. I. also demonstrated that two systems of parallel dislocations might be produced by the same elevating force, the direction of the one system being perpendicular to that of the other. I also pointed out the circumstances under which, according to theory, there would be a necessary deviation from parallelism in these systems, and I indicated the relations which such deviations would bear, in certain general cases, to the boundary of the disturbed district, and to the particular configuration of its surface. On these points I proceeded farther, in theory, than geologists had gone in observation. There are still few districts, even in those countries with which we are geologically best acquainted, where observations have been made in sufficient detail to bring this subject, as a branch of descriptive geology, to the point to which 1 have carried it in theory.
  Under these circumstances my attention was directed to the district of the Weald in Kent, Surrey and Sussex, as one in which the phaenomena of elevation might be expected to accord with correct theoretical results in a greater degree than in many other cases, on account of the regularity of its boundary, and the apparent absence of the effects of that more violent, local, or irregular action of the elevating force, which it must ever be impossible to reduce to calculation.

When I came, however, to examine the descriptions which we already possessed of the geological structure of the district, I found them too imperfect and fragmentary to enable me to detect with certainty the accurate laws of the phaenomena, or to allow me to appeal to them as tests of the accuracy of my theoretical views.
  The general anticlinal structure of this tract has been long known. Dr. Manteli and Mr. Lyell recognized also the existence of several longitudinal anticlinal lines, running generally in an east and west direction. Dr. Manteli had also made several insulated observations on the dip of the strata in different localities; but I am not aware that either of these gentlemen so far directed his attention to observations of this kind, as to determine accurately the position or extent of any one of the lines of elevation, the existence of which they had recognized, much less to detect the true law by which (as we shall see hereafter) these lines are related. Dr. Fitton has also made several observations on the structure of the Weald, and has given some valuable sections in his memoir “ On the Formations below the Chalk,” a work to which I have constantly referred in my own investigations. Only one part of the Wealden district, however (the south-western), has been hitherto examined, with reference to its structure, in much detail. This portion, lying more especially in the neighbourhood of Pulborough, was carefully investigated by Mr. Martin, and described by him in a memoir published some years ago. The author in this memoir enters into some speculations concerning the general character of the whole tract comprised within the limits of the Wealden denudation, and especially directs attention to its transverse drainage. Almost every one of its rivers, in some parts of its course, passes nearly perpendicularly through one or more of the longitudinal ridges of the district, and finally escapes from it by passing transversely through the bounding chalk escarpment. It seerns almost impossible to render any account of this frequent transverse direction of the river- courses, without referring it to the original existence of transverse fissures, as Mr. Martin has done. He appears to have been the first to recognize distinctly what I conceive to be the real structure of the district in this respect, but his views were for the most part conjectural, except so far as they were applied to the neighbourhood of Pulborough. With respect to other parts of the district, they appeared to rest principally on analogy, and not on facts furnished in detail by direct observation. I determined therefore to attempt to supply the deficiency of evidence in that large portion of the Wealden district which had not been examined in sufficient detail; and since the analogy which the denudation of the Bas Boulonnais bears to that of the Weald, and the relative positions of the two districts, indicate the great probability of their elevations having been contemporaneous, I considered it necessary, in order to render the investigation complete, to examine also the Bas Boulonnais, for the purpose of ascertaining whether its structure bears any definite relation to that of the Weald. The first part of the communication which I have now to make to the Society contains the results of these investigations ; the second part will contain a discussion of theoretical notions, founded on a general view of the phaenomena of the Wealden districts, together with those of the adjoining country as described by other observers.
  In stating what has hitherto been done with respect to the geological structure of this district, I may notice a section made by the late Mr. Farey from the North to the South Downs, across the centre of the Weald. In the lines of elevation which it recognizes, this section accords with my own observations ; but many of its details are evidently so entirely hypothetical, that I should not venture to appeal to it on any of the minuter points of structure which it professes to exhibit. It is also impossible, in noticing the labours of previous observers, to omit those of Dr. Manteli, whose name has long been so closely associated with the geology of the south-east of England. If I have been able to make but little use of his observations, it is that our objects have been entirely different; so that his work, abounding as it does with interesting matter in the department of the science to which it is especially devoted, contains but few observations bearing immediately on the objects of my own researches.
§ 1. THE WEALDEN DISTRICT.
  It would be useless to enter here into any detailed description of a tract of country of which the general geological features are so well known as those of the district comprised within the bounds of the Wealden denudation. It will only be necessary to state, that the tract to which my researches have been principally confined is bounded on the English side of the Channel by the clearly-defined escarpment of the chalk, extending from the coast near Folkstone, in a north-westerly direction, by the north-east of Ashford and of Maidstone and north of Seven Oaks, and thence in a westerly direction by Reigate, Dorking, Guildford and Farnham, after which it passes to the east of Alton and round Petersfield, whence it proceeds in a nearly easterly, and finally, in a nearly south-easterly direction by Lewes, to the coast at Beachy Head. The Bas Boulonnais is bounded by an exactly similar escarpment of chalk, commencing on the^north at Wissant, proceeding by Desvres and Samer, till it again meets the coast seven or eight miles south of Boulogne; its extent from north to south, parallel with the coast, being about twenty, and that from east to west, along the road from Boulogne to St. Omer, about twelve miles. It requires but little effort of the imagination to connect the two extremities of these escarpments at Folkstone and Wissant, as well as those at Beachy Head and the southern point of the Bas Boulonnais. Thus connected, the English and the French districts, with the intervening portion of the Channel, would form a tract which may be described generally as an elongated oval, but having a curvilinear instead of a rectilinear axis. Its length is about 150 miles, and its greatest breadth about 40 miles.
  Before I proceed to the particular description of phaenomena, it may be desirable to explain the precise sense in which I have used certain expressions in this paper. There are frequent instances in the Wealden district in which the section of a longitudinal elevation is such as represented in the annexed diagram, the beds dipping (and in many cases with great rapidity) in one direction, but preserving a sensible horizontality in the opposite one. This is obviously not an anticlinal arrangement, nor can the line from which the descending dip commences be termed with propriety an anticlinal line. I have called it a line of flexure, finding it almost essential to employ some distinctive term to denote it. All anticlinal and synclinal lines, lines of flexure, of fault, &c., I have frequently designated by the general term of lines of elevation.
  I shall now commence my description with an account of the central range of the Wealden district, consisting almost entirely of Hastings Sand.
  Hastings Anticlinal Line.—A well-defined ridge, forming the most striking feature in this part of the district, runs from Battle to the north of Hastings. The Hastings anticlinal line may be traced with great precision from within a mile of Battle to the coast. It appears to lie just on the northern side of the summit of the ridge, and runs in a straight line to meet the coast at a point south-east of Fairlight church. The northern side is the best defined, owing to the rapid dip of the beds on that side, which in some places is not less than 50° or 60° in a direction perpendicular to that of the ridge. On the southern side the average dip, though considerable, is not nearly so great. The point where this line meets the coast is well defined in the splendid natural section which the cliffs afford. It should be observed, however, that the general direction of the coast makes an angle of about 45° with that of the anticlinal line, and therefore makes about the same angle with the line of greatest dip, so that the apparent dip of the beds in the cliff is much less than their real dip. It is not however very great, and is much more regular than in the neighbourhood of Battlp. I could not trace the anticlinal line quite up to that place, to the north of which a distinct system of lines commences.
  Brightling and Battle Lines.—Brightling Down is one of the highest points in this part of the country, its height being stated to be 646 feet. The anticlinal line passes through its summit, where it is extremely well defined, the dip both on the north and south being very considerable. It extends westward through the northern extremity of Heathfield Park, beyond which I could detect no distinct evidence of its continuation. To the eastward it does not appear to be distinctly continued beyond the village of Brightling, which is situated on the extremity of that part of the range of hill. Immediately on the south of Brightling Hill is another on which Dallington is situated, and which is continued more or less distinctly to Battle. This line however is not anticlinal immediately to the south of Brightling Down, nor is the Brightling line transferred to it, where this subordinate range passes farther east than the Brightling one; for I distinctly ascertained the general dip to be to the south, on the north side of the Dallington range, about Darvel Beach and in Limekiln Wood.
  Further to the east, we obtain an instructive section along the new road from Battle to St. John’s Cross, which runs nearly in a straight line between those places. Immediately to the north of Battle, the hill on which the windmills stand is shown by the new cuttings to be strongly anticlinal. The direction of the anticlinal line appeared to coincide with that of the hill, and to be two points to the south of east (E.S.E.). It is not continued far to the east, nor to the west. 1 conceive it to be independent both of the Hastings and Brightling lines. Proceeding northward towards St. John’s Cross, we recognize a synclinal line in crossing the valley and small stream about a mile and a half from Battle ; and another at a point of the road east of Mountfield. The exact position of the anticlinal between them is not very distinctly marked, but must be very nearly as indicated on the map. North of the last-mentioned synclinal line the beds rise rapidly up to St. John’s Cross, on the north of which they appear to descend very gradually to the river at Robertsbridge, thus forming a third anticlinal line between Battle and that place. Of the two northernmost I had no means of determining the exact directions.
  On the west of the new road above mentioned, the dip is said to be very irregular, and the country much dislocated. The irregularity is probably more apparent than real, as far as regards the positions of the lines of elevation. There is scarcely any irregularity in the dip along the new road, which affords an almost continuous section from Battle to St. John’s Cross, though the existence of great irregularity might have been inferred from merely insulated observations along that section. Still we might reasonably expect some irregularity about the point where the Brightling line terminates, and the three lines above described commence. It is certain also that there has been more than ordinary disturbance along the whole of the Brightling and Hastings lines. In the neighbourhood of Battle, particular beds of limestone have been worked to a considerable extent, and can be easily identified. By means of these beds a fault has been detected in Archer’s Wood of sixty fathoms, as stated by Dr. Manteli*. Indications of great dislocation are observable also in many other places.
  On the east of the new road from Battle to St. John’s Cross, it would seem impossible to identify the three lines above mentioned to any considerable distance. The valley which passes down to Winchelsea (at least the upper part of it) may, possibly, have originated in a dislocation connected with the central line. At Brede (on the northern side) one of the beds of hard limestone above mentioned is worked for repairing the roads, and I was informed that the same bed was found at the level of the river, a point lower by several hundred feet than the village. Supposing this to be the case, there must be an enormous fault running along this part of the valley. The dip on both sides of the valley is to the east of north. On the north of the valley also, half-way between Sedlescomb and the Udymer great road, a new cut showed the strata rising southward at an angle of about 25° to a ridge running south of east, with a parallel valley on the north. Along this ridge I have no doubt of the existence of a line of elevation.
  I have been the more particular in the description of the phaenomena between Battle and Brightling, because the line terminating at one of those places has been represented as a continuation of the one terminating at the other, the whole line having thus been made to assume a somewhat irregular and anomalous form. This is, in fact, one of those localities in which insulated observations are sure to lead to erroneous conclusions respecting true geological structure, the discovery of which can frequently be effected only by the most careful and laborious researchf.
  Bexhill Line.—In proceeding westerly along the coast from Hastings, the natural section formed by the cliff exhibits the beds of Hastings sand dipping apparently towards the west, their real mean dip being about two points west of south. This dip is continued to St. Leonards, where it takes the opposite direction. In a newly- cut road in the direction of greatest dip, about a mile west of that place, the inclination of the beds was far more distinctly exhibited than in the face of the cliff, the direction of wdiich is not far from that of the strike. This reverse dip is distinctly continued to a point south-east of Bexhill, where the south-westerly dip is again resumed, and a little farther to the west the beds are brought for a short space into nearly a vertical position. The disturbance has produced a fault, the magnitude of which is too great to be determined by the section of the cliff, which does not exceed 20 or 30 feet in height. At some distance beyond the fault, the gentle dip of the beds (in a direction about S.S.W.) is again resumed. I did not extend the examination further.
   A range of low hill is represented on the Ordnance Map, running from Bexhill to Ninfield. It was difficult to detect distinct evidence of structure along this ridge; but I obtained what I considered to be a satisfactory observation, which gave the north-easterly dip about a mile and a half north-west of Bexhill. I was thus led to conclude that the line of elevation, which doubtless accompanies this range for at least two or three miles from the sea, passes along its southern side after passing to the north of Bexhill. I could detect no trace of it near Ninfield.
   Hurstmonceaux Line.—A low range of hill similar to that last mentioned, and in a direction parallel to it, passes to the north of Hurstmonceaux Park. The part called Windmill Hill is distinctly anticlinal. There can be no doubt that a line of elevation coincides with the general direction of the hill.
   Transverse Fractures of the Hastings Line.—About half-way between Battle and Hastings the new road has been cut through High Beach Hill, and exhibits a fine section of a great disturbance, produced by a transverse fracture which has given a local anticlinal arrangement to the beds, and formed a short transverse anticlinal line. The hill and transverse valley on the north of it, by the top of which the road passes, have evidently originated in this cross dislocation.
   The new road above mentioned runs, nearly in a direct line, from High Beach Hill to Hastings, and affords the evidence of another transverse fracture along the valley immediately on the west of Silver Hill. There appears to be an enormous fault, as indicated by the two portions of what is I think unquestionably the same stratum, and belonging to Dr. Mantell’s Ashburnham beds. The fault is probably several hundred feet. The valley along which it appears' to run is marked in the Ordnance Map by the course of a rivulet south-east and south of the village of Hallington.
   Another great fault is also exhibited by the cutting of the same road at its entrance into the western extremity of Hastings. Dark, shaly, argillaceous beds there abut directly against the massive beds of white sandstone. The direction of the fault is very nearly perpendicular to the Hastings line. I could find no distinct evidence of it at other points more remote from the coast, though I think it probable, from external indications, that it is continued across the central ridge, on the east of the village of Ore.
   Wadhurst and Hawkshurst Line.—About seven miles north of the westerly portion of the Brightling line is a range of hill, distinctly marked on the Ordnance Map, passing through Wadhurst. About three-quarters of a mile north of Wadhurst, I observed a rapid dip to the north. At Best Beech Hill the beds are much disturbed, and somewhat irregularly; and a little north of Mark Cross (near the western extremity of the ridge), in a large quarry near the road to Tunbridge Wells, the dip is observed to be rapid and to the north. At Mark Cross and south of it the dip is very small, but tends towards the south. Likewise in a large pit on the great road near to and south of Wadhurst, the dip, though not large, is distinctly to the south. These observations prove the existence of an anticlinal line along the ridge above mentioned. Its continuation to Hawkshurst is distinctly proved by observations immediately on the north and south of the line, the dip being generally from 5° to 10°*. I was unable to trace it with any distinctness farther than Mea- grane Hill. The hills of Sandhurst and Bonhurst appear to have been the result of surrounding denudation rather than of elevation.
   About three miles to the north-east of these latter places is a range of hill through Rolvenden and Bennenden, which does not appear however to be connected with any continuous line of curvature of the strata. On the contrary, in returning from Bennenden to Hawkshurst I obtained a series of observations which gave the dip uniformly east of north, proving the continuity of the nearly northeasterly dip as far as the axis of the Bennenden range. From Rolvenden to Bennenden I could find no evidence of any sensible inclination of the beds. This range does not in fact form a very decided feature, and is probably due to denudation.

   The western portions of this line and of the Brightling line comprise between them an extensive valley, the formation of which would probably in the first instance be the necessary consequence of the elevation of these lines. Its drainage is somewhat remarkable, the only outlet for its waters being at Robertsbridge, whence they are discharged into the Rother. A comparatively small depression wTould convert the lower part of this valley into a small bay communicating with the sea by the valley of the Rother. It would seem probable that in the gradual rise of the land it had formerly existed under that form, and that a great part of the denudation, to which its actual form is probably in a great measure due, was thus effected. Its western extremity is bounded by the high land which is continued southward from Frant by Rotherfield to the west of Heathfield Park, the point to which I traced the Brightling anticlinal line. This transverse high land forms a watershed, from the highest points of which the water descends on the one side through the valley just described to be discharged into the sea by the Rother, and on the other to the Ouse, which passes by Lewes and discharges itself at Newhaven. It does not however assume the character of a transverse ridge, its general elevation being much the same as the western extremities of the Brightling, Wadhurst, and Frant Hills on the one hand, and considerably less than that of Crowborough on the other. The Brightling anticlinal line seems to lose all its distinctness when it meets this high land.
   Crowborough Anticlinal Line.—The elevated range including Ashdown Forest on the east and St. Leonards Forest on the west manifestly constitutes the central ridge of the middle portion of the Wealden district. It is clearly an anticlinal elevation, though it seems difficult to determine with perfect accuracy the position of the anticlinal line. On the northern side of Ashdown Forest there is a gradual but small continuous rise of the beds towards the summit; and on the south side 1 traced a much more rapid and continuous dip to the south from near Crowborough Gate to High Hurst Wood, two miles south of the former place. In considerable quarries at the latter place the dip was about 15°. The surface nearer the summit of the Forest is occupied by loose sand, which affords no means of observing the dip. There cannot however be much error in concluding that the anticlinal line passes near to Crowborough Beacon.
   The above observations were made in an excursion from Tunbridge Wells to Crowborough. I also crossed this central elevation from Cuckfield to East Grinsted by Balcombe. The dip at the cutting of the Brighton railroad near the last-mentioned place was considerable, and to the north, nor could I detect any indications of southerly dip in crossing Tilgate Forest. From this it appeared probable that the position of the anticlinal line was not north of Balcombe, nor can it certainly be far south of that place, as shown by evidence which I shall speak of shortly, Of the position of this line between Crowborough Beacon and Balcombe, I have no evidence, but the general continuity of the line between these points is rendered almost certain by the general structure of this part of the district. We may conclude therefore that it here runs almost exactly east and west, and we observe that if it be continued easterly, it precisely coincides with the Wadhurst line. These two lines may therefore he regarded as continuations of one and the same line.
   When I thus speak of the unity and continuity of the line between Crowborough and Balcombe, and to the west of the latter place, I am tacitly referring the formation of the Ashdown and St. Leonards ridge to the existence of a single anticlinal line, or (speaking with reference to my theoretical view’s) of a single longitudinal fissure. It is very possible however that this characteristic ridge may be due to the original and simultaneous formation of several longitudinal fissures, so near to each other, that we are unable to distinguish their separate effects by the outward structure of the elevation. Still such a system of lines, occupying but a small transversal space (as in the present instance), may in descriptive language be spoken of as a single line, and we may still assert the probable identity of this system and the Wadhurst line as in the preceding paragraph.
   On the south of Balcombe and between that place and Cuckfield is an east and west valley which forms a distinct feature in that neighbourhood, and of which the length and direction are marked on the Ordnance Map by the course of a small stream, one of those which, by their confluence, ultimately form the river Ouse. In descending into this valley on the northern side, by Slaugham Park, the beds are observed to dip southward with the hill, which shows that the Crowborough line must pass to the north of the Park, agreeing with the direction previously assigned to it. This direction, continued westward, would pass very near Horsham, but that neighbourhood presents no external indications of disturbance, the strata being very nearly horizontal. I examined the quarries near Warnham, at Theall near Slinfold, three miles west of Horsham, at Stammerham, two miles south-west of it, and at Tower Hill near Horsham. In all these places there was scarcely a sensible deviation from perfect horizontality *. There was no evidence of the continuation of any distinct anticlinal line west of St. Leonards Forest.
   Cuckjield Line.—On the south of the valley just mentioned as passing between Balcombe and Cuckfield is a small elevated range, sufficiently determinate to give to the valley which it bounds a perfectly distinct character. It is a subordinate anticlinal ridge. I found distinct evidence of a northerly dip in descending into the valley along the London road from Cuckfield. Similar evidence is found in the quarries near Cuckfield. On the south side of this hill the general southerly dip of the district commences. I obtained also the most decisive evidence of the continuation of this line between two and three miles east of Cuckfield, at the cutting for the Brighton railroad, which being there transverse to the anticlinal line, exhibited it with great distinctness. The dip to the north at this point could not be much less than 15°. The line appeared to run exactly east and west. It is probably co-extensive at least with the valley to the north of it, extending three miles west of Cuckfield. How far it may extend to the east beyond the railroad, I had not the means of determining. I detected no evidence of it in crossing the general central ridge from Uckfield to East Grinsted.
  I may here remark, that in passing along the London and Lewes road, I observed distinct evidence of anticlinal arrangement of the beds close to Uckfield on the south of the town, the strike being east and west. If the Brightling line were continued, it would pass very near this point. I am far from insisting on this as any evidence of the continuation of that line westward of Heathfield Park. It is perhaps more probable that the position of the beds near Uckfield is due to one of those undulations which, although of comparatively small extent, still follow the general law of those which, on a larger scale, are designated as anticlinal elevations. A more detailed examination of the district would probably detect many such minor anticlinals ; nor would such an investigation be without its interest and importance, because the greater the number of minor phaenomena which can be comprised in our generalizations, the stronger becomes the proof of the truth of the laws established by observation, and of the theories which distinctly deduce such laws from the operation of physical causes. Such detailed research however belongs peculiarly to the province of the local geologist, by whom alone we can hope to see it carried to the extent which the actual state of theory demands.
  Before we proceed with the description of other anticlinal lines, it may be well to direct attention to the relations existing between the external configuration of that portion of the district already considered, and its internal structure. The Battle and Brightling ridges, two of the most characteristic, have manifestly originated, as we have seen, in the formation of the anticlinal lines with which they coincide; and it is equally evident that the valley between the Brightling and the "Wadhurst line has owed its origin to the formation of the intermediate synclinal line. This arrangement of the beds would necessarily guide more or less the action of the denuding causes to which the complete formation of the valley must be referred. This valley, as I have shown, is bounded on the west by the high land in the neighbourhood of Rotherfield, where there appears to be no considerable inclination of the strata; while farther westward the elevation of Ashdown Forest has given a considerable and continuous declination of the strata to the south, with which the surface of the country is there in accordance. The actual drainage ot the south side of the central ridge from Rotherfield to St. Leonards Forest appears to have originated in this continuous descent of the beds from Ashdown, by which an opening was afforded to the water from the western part of the range, while the Cuckfield anticlinal ridge presented a barrier to their southerly progress. Finally, the configuration of the surface between the ridge just mentioned and the central one is manifestly due to the internal structure, with which also the general descent of the surface to the south from the Cuckfield ridge is in perfect accordance.
  Frant Line.—About three miles north of the Wadhurst anticlinal line is a range of hill, extending from Etheridge Park on the west, by Frant, nearly to Lamber- hurst on the east. In ascending the hill from Tunbridge Wells by Frant, the dip is small but distinctly to the south, and therefore opposite to the general dip on this side the central range. A new cut in the great road also immediately south of Lamberhurst exhibits the section of an anticlinal line with rapid dips. These observations have convinced me that this range (which forms a marked feature in the country) originated in a curvature of the strata, but such that the deviation from horizontality had not been very considerable, except near Lamberhurst. The prominent feature which the range presents to the north, is probably more due to the denudation of the valley below than to the elevation of the hill. Still both analogy and direct evidence (as far as it extends) indicate the origin I have assigned to it. It will be observed that it preserves an exact parallelism with the Wadhurst line. All traces of it appear to be lost in the transverse high land already mentioned as passing by Frant and Rotherfield.
  Bidborough Hill.—This hill is about three miles south of Tunbridge. The road from that place to Tunbridge Wells affords a good section, exhibiting the upper beds of the Hastings sand rising rapidly from beneath the Weald clay, which approaches the foot of the hill on the north side. There must necessarily be an exactly similar rise of the beds along the north side of the hill further to the west, since the beds of the Hastings sand on the side and summit of the ridge rise much above the level of the upper surface of the Weald clay in the valley. On the south side of the hill I could make no good observations of the dip except near Southborough, where the beds are nearly horizontal. More westward there were indications of a considerable dip to the south, which seems probable also from the external form of the hill. I cannot however assert such to be the case from good observations. The western extremity of the hill is bounded by the transverse valley of the Medway; the Tunbridge road passes over its eastern extremity. This may be considered as a line of flexure rather than an anticlinal line.

  Brenchley Hill.—-This hill is situated about five miles nearly east of Bidborough Hill, to which it is exactly similar, except that it affords more distinct evidence of its being strictly an anticlinal ridge. East of the castle I found opposite dips of nearly 20° to the east of north and about 16° to the south, and so near to each other as to determine accurately the position of the anticlinal line. It there lies a little south of the summit of the ridge.
  Brenchley and Bidborough Line.—Bidborough and Brenchley Hills are connected by a range which overlooks, the valley occupied by the Weald clay, and is formed by the comparatively rapid rise of the beds of the Hastings sand from beneath the clay. It diminishes in height (probably by denudation) as it approaches the eastern extremity of Bidborough Hill, from which it is separated by an ill-defined transverse valley. A distinct line of flexure thus connects the two hills above mentioned,
. though the evidence may be somewhat less forcible than it is in those two striking localities. The line of curvature is continued in an exactly similar manner to the west of Bidborough, but becomes less distinct as we proceed westward, and loses all determinate character north of East Grinsted. It dies away also in the same manner at the other extremity east of Brenchley Hill.
  Transverse Valleys and Fractures of the Central Ridge.—It will be observed that the continuity of the range just described is broken in three places, at Penshurst by the valley of the Medway, between Bidborough and Brenchley, and again east of Brenchley Hill by the valley before mentioned, along which a small stream rising at the foot of Frant Hill and passing by Lamberhurst finds its way to the Medway. The first is the most remarkable of these transverse valleys.
  I have already spoken of the watershed formed by the transverse high land which passes by Rotherfield and Frant; and if we proceed northward from the latter place along the Tunbridge road, we find (as shown by the map) that the streams which rise along that line on the right run to the east, and those on the left run westward, so that the watershed is continued northward as far as the valley of the Weald clay, notwithstanding the great alteration in the external surface produced by denudation to the north of Frant Hill. The Medway is formed by the confluence, about Ashurst, of the streams which thus flow westward, with others running principally from west to east along longitudinal valleys. From this point it takes its course by Penshurst directly through the longitudinal range above described. If this transverse break in the range were now filled up, a lake of considerable area would be formed in the valley of the Medway, with branches ramifying along the different valleys which communicate with it. Supposing such a barrier to have once existed, in this and similar cases which may hereafter be considered, the point to which I would immediately direct attention is the evidence which may enable us to judge how far the destruction of the barrier may have been facilitated by the previous existence of a transverse fracture.

  It is probable that such a fracture, when of considerable magnitude, would frequently be attended with considerable irregularity in the position of the beds immediately contiguous to it. Such however would not necessarily be the case ; and we may doubtless assert the converse proposition as far more generally true; viz. that great irregularity of elevation will be attended with transverse fracture. Consequently, while a great and irregular inclination of the beds at any transverse section of a longitudinal range almost necessarily affords evidence of transverse fracture, the absence of such irregularity will be no proof of the non-existence of such dislocation. This conclusion is abundantly corroborated by the phsenomena of the mining districts, where the evidence on such points is so much more determinate than in those in which the observations are merely superficial.
  This irregular disturbance of the strata is remarkable along the sides of the transverse valley of the Medway. Near a spot termed Nashes on the Ordnance Map, the dip was between 40° and 50° to the north ; and at a point on the opposite side of the river, and about equidistant from it, I estimated the dip at about 30° south-east. At other points the disturbance was equally great and irregular. It is well seen in the large quarries south of Ashour, where the dip is nearly 20° to the north-east, which is perfectly anomalous considered with reference to that of the general elevation. These facts leave no doubt, in my opinion, of the original existence of a large transverse fracture which has determined the position of the present transverse valley, and facilitated its formation by aqueous agency.
  I found similar evidence, though not perhaps equally conclusive, near the transverse valley marked by the course of the river from Lamberhurst to the east of Brenchley Hill. I have already noticed the evidence of an anticlinal line at Lamberhurst. The disturbance there is very considerable, as it is likewise at a point on the opposite side of the valley and nearly equidistant from it, in the large quarries west of Bedgbury Park, as already noticed, where the dip is between 20° and 30°. Goud- hurst is situated on a hill which borders the valley on the east, and forms a prominent feature in this neighbourhood. In ascending it from the south by the road which enters the town, we recognise its origin in a great disturbance, which has given a dip to the beds of about 40° to the south. The disturbance appears to be local and irregular; for on the north-east side of the hill the dip appeared (though not very distinctly) to be considerable and to the north-east; and about Iden Green (a mile and a half to the east) no indications of disturbance were visible, the beds being there sensibly horizontal, as well as about Cranbrook, a fact already noticed. Hence I conclude Goudhurst Hill to have been due to one of those irregular disturbances which indicate transverse fracture. Also about Winchet Hill, the point on the east side of the valley exactly opposite to the eastern extremity of Brenchley Hill, I observed considerable irregularity of disturbance.

   These circumstances combined afford strong evidence of the valley in question having originated in a transverse fissure.
   I shall now proceed to the western and south-western parts of the district.
   I have already described the general horizontality of the beds near Horsham, and the consequent absence of any determinate anticlinal line. Still the general configuration of the district shows distinctly the continuation of the anticlinal elevation. The greensand of Hind Head for instance is much higher than the same beds at those points north and south of that hill where they pass under the chalk escarpments ; but this greater elevation being principally acquired soon after emergence from beneath the chalk, the central portion is left nearly horizontal. This relative elevation is also in great measure lost still further to the west by the gradual westward declination of the beds ; and therefore, when we arrive at the chalk on the west of the general denudation, it becomes still more difficult to assign any determinate position to a distinct anticlinal line. Mr. Martin however appears to have recognized, in an east and west valley near Haslemere, some evidence of its continuance along that valley, a position which very well accords with the general elevation, and also with the westerly prolongation of the Hastings sands.
   Greenhurst Anticlinal Line.—This line, running near and parallel to the South Downs, is one of the most important geological features in the south-western portion of the district. It has already been described in detail by Mr. Martin. The evidence of this line, as pointed out to me by that gentleman, is perfectly clear from the chalk at Piecomb on the east to Coldwaltham Park (south-west of Pul- borough) on the west. It will be immediately recognized on the map.
   Pulborough Line of Flexure.—About two miles to the north of this line and parallel to it, we recognize a well-marked line of flexure passing close above the village of Pulborough. The annexed diagram represents the section from the chalk escarpment to the Weald clay, in a direction nearly north and south, and passing by Wiggonholt Common and Pulborough.
  The Greenhurst line meets the section at A, and the line of flexure at B.
  This line of flexure does not extend far to the east of Pulborough. On the west of that place it is well defined near Stopham and Fittleworth.

  Midhurst Line of Flexure.—A line exactly similar to the one just described, and sufficiently well defined, passes by Sellham and Midburst to Trotton Common. A north and south section, however, across this line differs from the above section in the absence of the anticlinal disposition of the beds there represented at (A). The beds rise to the line of flexure (B) directly from the chalk.
  This line ranges exactly with the Pulborough line. They both appear to me to belong in fact to the same line, as represented in the map. Mr. Martin however appears to think, that what I have termed the Midhurst line is a continuation of the Greenhurst anticlinal line, which he supposes to take a north-westerly direction from the point where I have considered it to terminate, nearly in the direction of the river, to Sellham. There cannot, I conceive, be any very positive evidence of the junction of these two lines, and therefore I have preferred the view above given respecting them. The difference however between this view and Mr. Martin’s is of no importance whatever.
  Leioes Anticlinal Line.—In the cliffs and chalk-pits north-west of Lewes, and in those north-east of it on the opposite side of the river, the upper chalk with flints dips with a rapidity which would, at a comparatively short distance to the south, carry the upper beds of the chalk down to the level of the bed of the river, whereas the chalk hills in that direction, on the opposite side of the chalk valley in which Kingston and Falmer are situated, are nearly as high as the escarpment north-west of Lewes. There must necessarily therefore be either a fault, or a rise of the beds to the north from a synclinal line, by which the chalk about Kingston is brought up to its actual elevation. The complete explanation is given by the natural section on the opposite side of the river near Southerham. The rapid ascent of the beds to the south is there beautifully exhibited. The synclinal line passes into the cliff just about the coombe-like valley (marked in the Ordnance Map) immediately north of Southerham, in the insulated chalk hill east of Lewes. It is doubtless connected with the formation of that valley. The southerly ascent of the beds is seen very distinctly till they meet the valley between the hill just mentioned and the general chalk escarpment on the south of it, where the regular dip to the south is again resumed. The anticlinal line must therefore run along this valley. Mr. Martin has detected farther indications of its continuation to the east, and, for the reason above stated, it is certain that it strikes into the chalk on the west of Lewes. The exact coincidence of the direction of this line with that of the Greenhurst line renders it highly probable that the one is a prolongation of the other.

  At Piecomb and south-east of Lewes, (the points at which the Greenhurst and Lewes lines of elevation respectively strike into the projecting chalk mass,) there are two large coombe-like valleys which are worthy of remark, as indicating in the most unequivocal manner, the influence of a line of dislocation in aiding and guiding the operation of denuding causes. Had the action of these causes continued, it is easy to see how, as far as the dislocations may proceed, the projecting chalk between Lewes and Piecomb would have gradually disappeared as much by the process thus indicated on its flanks as by the effect produced on the general front escarpment. From Piecomb to a point directly south of Petworth, as well as to the east of the insulated chalk hill at Lewes, this operation has been completed, which has probably been owing to the more decided character of the dislocation
along those portions of the anticlinal lines than between Lewes and Piecomb. I have stated my reasons for doubting the actual prolongation of the Greenhurst line west of the projecting chalk escarpment directly south of Petworth. This projection is probably due to the feebler influence of the dislocation as it approached that point. The two coombe-like valleys above mentioned may afford a useful analogy in forming our conclusions in some other cases to be hereafter described.
  Transverse Valleys near the Greenhurst Line.—On the north-west of Pulborough the river Arun makes its way through the lofty escarpment of the greensand, as described some years ago by Mr. Martin, who also pointed out to me a remarkable and anomalous dislocation at the point immediately east of the transverse valley where the river first penetrates the escarpment. The beds dip north-west at an angle of about 30°, whereas in the vicinity there is a very regular dip to the south.
This has been justly attributed I think by Mr. Martin to the transverse fracture in which we conceive the valley to have originated. The evidence is precisely similar to that already adduced with respect to the transverse breaks in the Bidborough
range. It will be remarked too, that at Lodsworth, west of Petworth, one of the tributary streams to the Arun penetrates the greensand escarpment, in the manner above described. A small stream also descends down a deep valley east of Petworth
from the upper part of the greensand range, and Mr. Martin informed me that there exists evidence of this valley having in like manner originated in a cross fracture. 
  I would also here direct attention to the manner in which the chalk ridge is traversed by the Arun, the Adur, the Ouse and the Cuckmare, circumstances to which I shall again allude in the sequel.
  I shall now proceed to the north-western part of the district.
  The Farnham, Guildford, Dorking and Godstone Line of Flexure.—The most remarkable part of this line is the chalk hill called the Hog’s Back, extending from Guildford to a point within about two miles of Farnham, where it ceases somewhat abruptly. The dip at Guildford is considerable, but increases as we proceed westerly till, about Seal, it amounts to 70° or 80°, being everywhere exactly north. This dip carries the chalk rapidly down under the tertiary beds, leaving a narrow and lofty ridge of chalk. The basseting edge of the gault occupies a narrow strip at the foot of the escarpment, but the upper beds of the lower greensand occupy a far larger proportionate surface. This is owing to the fact of their inclination being very much less than that of the chalk, as represented in the annexed diagram.
  The section through Crookbury Hill is similar to the one here given, except that the lower greensand rises to a greater height than in the instance before us. This elevation shows that the beds of that formation must have a considerable dip from thence to the Hog’s Back ; and this dip, though much less than that of the chalk, is considerably greater than that of the greensand beds further south, which would otherwise have occupied a very much smaller space in that direction than they actually occupy. This change in the magnitude of the dip probably takes place near the hill, but I saw no distinct reason to suppose that the hill is anticlinal, as Mr. Martin appears to think it. The same observation will apply I think to the whole of his Pease Marsh anticlinal line, east of the hill in question. The proper line of flexure (as previously defined) from the western extremity of the Hog’s Back to the east of Puttenham is unquestionably very near the foot of the escarpment ; and by Guildford, it runs not far south of St. Catherine’s Hill, and close under the hill above Shalford, and the prominent point on which Margaret’s Chapel is situated. At Guildford the inclination of the chalk, though still very considerable, is much less than it is farther to the west; but here it is continued without diminution to the first escarpment of greensand, constituting the hills just mentioned. That of Margaret’s Chapel attains a higher elevation than the chalk escarpment, as represented in the annexed section, though it is not much more than a quarter of a mile from its foot. The sand emerges from beneath the chalk in the same manner by Albury, Shiere and Wotton, though, as we proceed easterly, the first escarpment of greensand (at the foot of which the river runs by Albury) becomes less determinate. On the south of this line I could find no distinct indications of southerly dip ; on the contrary, all my observations indicated a gradual rise of the beds from the foot of the first to the summit of the second escarpment of greensand along Leith Hill and Hurtwood Common. I therefore concluded that this was, throughout the whole of the range above mentioned, an extremely well-defined line of flexure, without being anticlinal. Mr. Martin regards the part of the line east of Guildford as a continuation of his Pease Marsh line.
  As we proceed westward of Gomshall, this line is perhaps somewhat less distinct. Immediately south of Dorking, however, it is well marked in Berry Hill, on the south side of which the Weald clay is brought to the surface, dipping rapidly to
the north. Still I found no indications of an anticlinal arrangement. In proceeding across the small valley in which Berry Hill Park is situated, and thence up the hill on the road to Leith Hill, we find the junction of the lower greensand and Weald clay at a considerably greater elevation than at Berry Hill. From the latter to the former point, the Weald clay would probably rise by its general inclination in Leith Hill, which is much smaller than that with which it rises up to Berry Hill.
  The continuation of this line is also recognized along the range of hill extending from Park Hill, Reigate, by Bletchingley to Tilburstow Hill, south of Godaiming. The Weald clay appears at a considerable elevation on the south side of the latter hill. If the inclination with which it rises to that point were continued south of it, the width of the surface occupied by this formation would probably not exceed three times its thickness. The actual width is however about four miles. There must consequently be a great change of inclination immediately to the south of Tilburstow Hill, which distinctly proves the continuation of the line of elevation up to that point.
  Evidence of Transverse Fractures between Farnham and Godstone.—Leith Hill is the highest hill in the whole district, being 993 feet above the level of the sea. The Weald clay in its south escarpment rises to the height of 200 or 300 feet above the valley at its foot. The dip appears to be generally regular from the summit to the first escarpment of greensand already described. It presents to us some important indications of transverse fracture.
  At the south-east corner of the hill, near the small hamlet of Cold Harbour, a great local disturbance has evidently taken place, and is shown by the position of the beds in the side of the hill south-west of the hamlet and in the quarries near it. The direction of the fracture is also indicated by the deep-cut valley running northward from the village. The whole of this picturesque spot, as we descend from the summit of the hill by Kittlands, is strongly indicative of local disturbance. I attribute these appearances to a transverse fracture running north and south along the above-mentioned valley. The indentation in the face of the escarpment on the south, exactly opposite the deep-cut valley on the north, indicates the manner in which the denuding agents have been guided and aided in then- work by the fracture ; and we easily conceive bow, if their operation had been continued for a comparatively short time longer, the eastern extremity of this hill would have become an insulated mass, like the chalk hill on the east side of Lewes.
  Immediately to the west of Leith Hill, we also observe a deep indentation in the face of the hill (distinctly marked on the Ordnance Map), which forms one of those coombe-like valleys before noticed at Piecomb and Lewes, the origin of which I refer to the existence of a cross fracture operating precisely as the longitudinal one has undoubtedly operated at those places. There is likewise another indentation of the same kind a little further to the west, as shown also by the map; and an exactly similar case also presents itself at Hascombe in the escarpment of the greensand south of Godaiming. In all these instances there is not merely an indentation in the face of the hill, but a narrow valley has been formed, of greater or less depth, through the top of the ridge, and is continued down the regular slope of the hill on the opposite side. In each of these transverse valleys, and in others of the same kind, there exists a perennial spring a little below the highest point of the valley on the sloping side of the hill, and in general also a correspond* Dr. Manteli recognizes a fault in this hill, and I have no doubt that such is the case, and that it probably extends some distance westward. It is very possible that this long line of flexure may in several places become a line of fault, but the distinction is immaterial as regards my own theoretical views in this district. They are equally lines of elevation.

I have observed the temperature of a considerable number of springs of this description, and have found it, at different times of the year, to be uniformly about 51° or 52° Fahr. These springs seem strongly confirmative of the existence of transverse dislocations, of which they would be almost the necessary consequences.
  Transverse River-courses through the Greensand Escarpment.—In the transverse valleys just described, we may probably recognise the earliest stage in the formation of those large transverse valleys which have resulted from the removal in such places of the whole escarpment of the greensand, and through which the transverse drainage of the district takes place. One of these is opposite Guildford, and another near Dorking. The wider these valleys are, the less likely are they to afford present indications of any transverse dislocations in which they may have originated. In neither of these cases have I been able to recognise direct proofs of such origin. Our conclusions respecting them can only, therefore, rest on analogy.
  There is also another curious case of a transverse river-course, opposite the western extremity of the Hog’s Back, where the western branch of the Wey, instead of pursuing what might appear its natural course at the foot of that hill, cuts directly through the greensand ridge west of Cooksbury Hill. It seems to have an obvious connexion with the change of structure which is observable between
the chalk ridge just mentioned and Farnham. I have already stated that the dip towards the western end of that ridge is not less than 70° or 80°, whereas at Farnham it is not more perhaps than about 10°. This change accounts for the sudden termination of the ridge, and indicates moreover a transverse curvature, such as must almost necessarily be accompanied by a transverse fracture, which, continued in a direction exactly south from thence, would account for the actual and apparently anomalous direction of the river-course as above described.
  West of the supposed transverse fracture just mentioned, the Guildford line loses its distinct character. I doubt its continuance much to the west of Farnham. Near that place I believe considerable disturbance is indicated by subterranean water-courses, but I could detect no conclusive external evidence of a line of curvature or anticlinal line beyond that place. Mr. Martin’s Pease Marsh line, however, somewhat south of the former, seems, as it approaches the chalk westward, to assume a more determinate character than I conceive it to have nearer Guildford. Towards the east I have shown that the Guildford line extends to Tilburstow Hill. Immediately cast of that hill is another break through the greensand escarpment, to the east of which we find a line of elevation, which I shall now proceed to describe.
  Seven Oaks Line.—This line was first noticed by Dr. Fitton in his memoir “ On the Strata below the Chalk.” He traced it from Montreal Park to a point between Westerliam and Limpsfield. I also found indications of it nearly as far to the east as Seal. In some places (as at Dry Hill Farm, west of Sundridge) it assumes a distinct anticlinal character ; at other places it appears to be a line of curvature, the beds rising rapidly from the north, and being continued with a gradual ascent to the greensand escarpment. I did not examine the country in the immediate vicinity of Limpsfield, to ascertain whether this line was a continuation of the Guildford and Godstone line or not. On that account, as well as from the circumstances of its assuming a somewhat different character and deviating in some degree from the direction of that line, I have given it a distinct appellation. They both probably belong strictly to the same continuous line of dislocation.
  From the eastern extremity of this line to the coast at Folkstone, I believe there is no distinct analogous line of elevation, either along the greensand escarpment, or between it and the escarpment of the chalk. The beds rise with a gradual and easy inclination from beneath the chalk, and present no distinct evidence, so far as I have been able to detect, of any determinate line of elevation.
  Transverse Valleys of the Seven Oaks Range of Greensand.—In this range are several transverse valleys similar to those already described in the Leith Hill range. One of the best-defined is that which descends from the escarpment by French Street and through Hill Park east of Westerliam. It is marked by a strong spring in the escarpment, and from French Street a rivulet descends to the north along the valley. I can feel no doubt of tbe origin of this valley having been due to a transverse fracture. We have a similar case again at Ide Hill, (about two miles to the east of the former,) though the valley is not so well-marked a feature as in the former instance. We have, however, the strong spring in the escarpment, with decided evidence of considerable local disturbance about the hill. A third case is found in a narrow valley which descends from Whitley Mill (about two miles soutb-west of Seven Oaks) immediately to the east of Riverhead. The disturbances along this valley demonstrate its origin to have been in a dislocation. The stream which works the mill originates almost entirely in the copious spring just above it, and in the escarpment at Everlands we find the corresponding spring. This has evidently been a strong fracture, and we may observe that its direction exactly ranges with that of the valley along which the river Darent penetrates the chalk.
  Maidstone, Ashford and Folkstone Range of Greensand.—On the east of Seven Oaks there is a break in the greensand escarpment, beyond which that formation occupies a considerably wider space opposite the entrance of the Medway into the chalk hills. The smallness of the general dip corresponds to this increase of width, and the phenomena of elevation appear to be less marked and interesting here than in the greater part of the area occupied by the greensand. East of the Medway the escarpment becomes extremely bold and abrupt till we come beyond Pluckley, a village five or six miles from Ashford. About Sutton and Ulcomb it begins to approximate to the chalk escarpment, and its general dip must be somewhat greater. Opposite Ashford we find another great break in the range, which, further south, no longer preserves by its elevation the distinct character which it generally possesses.
   The springs along this escarpment are not nearly so frequent as in those of Leith Hill and Seven Oaks, where the indications of disturbance are much greater; and we may particularly remark, that between the Medway and Sutton Valence, the Ordnance Map does not indicate the existence of a single rivulet flowing from the escarpment, and resembling those always formed elsewhere by the springs I have described. Now this part of the escarpment, from its altitude and vertically, would be particularly favourable to the formation of springs in cases where the water, arrested in its descent from the upper surface by some impervious stratum, would be compelled to seek a horizontal outlet, probably that which the nearest valley or escarpment would afford. Such springs however seldom occur in escarpments from which there is any considerable dip; and on this account the escarpments previously mentioned would be less favourable to the production of springs than that now spoken of. The comparative absence of springs in this escarpment is probably due to an absence of those dislocations in which perennial springs so frequently originate. This conclusion is in perfect harmony with the undisturbed character of this portion of the district. In the escarpment east of Sutton there are two or three large springs which I attribute to fractures ; there is also reason to believe that the disturbance has there been somewhat greater.
   River-courses through the Chalk Escarpment.—One of the most curious circumstances connected with the geological structure of the Wealden district is its transverse drainage through the apparently insurmountable barrier of the surrounding- chalk hills. The river-courses through these hills are far more striking than similar- instances already mentioned in the interior of the district, because, in the first place, the barrier broken through is of far greater strength and massiveness, and secondly, the continuous lateral longitudinal valleys seem to present scarcely the smallest impediment to a totally different drainage, by which the whole water of the district might have been carried along those valleys under the chalk escarpment, or that of the greensand, and discharged into the channel by Folkstone or Beachy Head. The most obvious solution of-the difficulty which the existence of the transverse river-courses under such circumstances presents to us, is in the hypothesis of their having originated, as in other cases, in transverse dislocation, and I have been desirous of verifying the truth of this hypothesis by the discovery of indications of disruption along the transverse valleys through the chalk. I have not, however, in these instances been very successful. The amount of the positive evidence of facts is not great. The point at which the river at Dorking breaks through the chalk escarpment is directly opposite the extremity of Leith Hill, which has obviously been a point of considerable disturbance, and it is highly probable that any transverse fracture there might also pass through the chalk. Near Seven Oaks, I have already shown that a well-defined line of fracture in the greensand would, if produced, pass along the river-course through the chalk. The course of the Arun through the chalk is along the direction of the valley by which it cuts through the greensand, and which affords direct evidence of dislocation. The course of the Ouse at Lewes seems also evidently connected with the great disturbance which has there taken place. But one of the best indications perhaps of the connexion between transverse valleys and dislocation in the chalk is afforded bv the well-marked valley along which the road from Godstone to London passes. The state of internal dislocation of the chalk is shown by the occasional bursting forth of a copious stream which takes its course northward down the valley. This does not occur, I believe, more than once in two or three years, and after a more than usually rainy period. I am told that the water possesses some property which renders it very destructive to vegetation.
  Another case also, though not comprised within the district with which I am immediately occupied, deserves notice. I allude to the transverse course of the river Medina through the middle of the central ridge of the Isle of Wight. The two parts of the ridge on the east and west respectively of the north and south transverse valley are not in the same line, but are so situated that their anticlinal lines are parallel and about two miles apart. The western portion of the ridge swells out to the north on the west of the cross valley to meet the extremity of the other portion, the dip of this connecting portion of the range being generally about north-west and south-east, or in some parts more easterly and westerly. The annexed diagram represents an east and west section of the valley of the Medina near Rookley, and very nearly in the direction of the more southerly anticlinal line. It presents a north and south line of flexure which must almost necessarily be ac
companied by a corresponding north and south fracture, in which I conceive the valley to have originated.

   Independently of such evidence as the above, the opinion that river-courses through the chalk escarpment have originated in transverse fissures must rest on analogy, or more especially on the degree in which the hypothesis harmonizes with that general theory which may be recognised as best accounting for the general phaenomena of elevation. I shall again refer to the same point in the concluding section of this memoir.
THE BAS BOULONNAIS.
   The denudation of the Bas Boulonnais has laid bare certain portions of the oolitic series, which, together with the cretaceous beds, were first described by Dr.Fitton and subsequently in greater detail by M. Roget, to whose work I am indebted
for much information. I shall find it necessary to repeat in some measure what had been previously observed by these gentlemen respecting the superficial range of the different beds of the district, in order to convey a more distinct conception
of its geological structure.
   At Wissant the gault is observed to emerge at a slight inclination, but is again immediately lost under the accumulations of sand (les dunes), extending nearly two miles along the coast. To the south of these dunes the Kimmeridge clay commences and occupies the whole range of coast, with the exception of some other dunes at the mouths of the rivers, till we arrive at those which extend along the coast from the southern part of this district for many miles. In proceeding east-ward from the coast, we find the coral rag and Oxford clay brought to the surface by a very small rise of the strata in that direction. On the south of the river which falls into the sea at Ambleteuse, the Oxford clav is the lowest bed which is thus exhibited (Diagram No. 26.). On the north of that river the same clay is brought up in like manner, but by a rather greater inclination of the strata, and
consequently at a smaller distance from the coast (Diagram No. 25.). An inferior portion of the oolites also here emerges from beneath the Oxford clay, and reposes immediately and unconformably on a portion of the carboniferous series consisting
of mountain limestone and interpolated beds of coal.
   This last circumstance exhibits that great discontinuity in the process of deposition, so generally recognised in this part of the world, which took place after the formation of the carboniferous series. Another important instance of a similar kind is also not less clearly shown in this district than in the southern coast of England, in the entire unconformity of the chalk, gault, and greensand with the beds on which they repose. To the west of the Calais road through Marquise, the lower of these beds appear to come in contact with the Oxford clay. Immediately to the east of that road the mountain limestone presents itself, and to the north of it the highly inclined beds of still lower formations, on which the chalk itself seems immediately to repose. In the north-east corner of the district, the cretaceous system overlies the upturned edges of the mountain limestone with its beds of coal; till we come to the south of the river which bounds the older formations, where the lower greensand is found to repose on the Oxford clay along the whole boundary of the district by Boursin, Colemberg, Henneveux, Brunembert, Lottinghen, and Desvres. To the south-west of the latter place, and at Samer, the greensand lies immediately on the coral rag; and along the southern boundary it reposes also on that formation or on the Kimmeridge clay.
   Oxford Clay.—The hill north-west of Marquise, on which the village of Basinghen is situated, presents to the east an escarpment of considerable elevation, the upper part of which is occupied by the Oxford clay, and the lower part by the oolitic beds immediately beneath it (Diagram No. 26.). These latter beds extend a little to the west of the Marquise and Calais road, where they form a thin and unconformable covering to the lower part of the platform formed by the surface of the mountain limestone.
   At some distance north of the village, the Basinghen Hill takes a northwesterly direction ; and from that point the Oxford clay descends and passes under the upper formations nearer the coast. On the south of Basinghen it likewise descends towards the south and passes beneath the valley of the Ambleteuse river. The coral rag also bassets out on the high ground west of Basinghen, passing down to the above-mentioned valley, and under the Kimmeridge clay which occupies the coast from Ambleteuse to the dunes at Wissant.
   On the south of the Ambleteuse river the Oxford clay forms an escarpment similar to that at Basinghen, but is at a greater distance from the coast (Diagram No. 26.). It passes from the east of Wievre Effroy to meet the valley of the Wimereux near Belle. On the south of that valley the high ground is projected eastward beyond Alinctun, where the Oxford clay still rises to the brow of the hill by Henneveux and Brunembert, as far as the Liane. The same formation also occupies the whole of the district east of this line of hill, till it is concealed beneath the unconformable covering of the cretaceous system as previously described. On the south of Brunembert the escarpment takes the westerly direction of the Liane, the upper part being formed of the coral rag and the lower of Oxford clay, the lower part of which probably stretches over the surface of the greater part of the valley comprised between the above escarpment on the north, the forest of Desvres on the west, and the boundary hills on the east and south. Thence it passes under the eminence on which the forest just mentioned is situated, and rises in the hill which still follows the course of the Liane in the south-westerly direction which that river suddenly assumes, till it meets the road from Boulogne to Desvres, near which after a gradual southerly declination the clay passes entirely under the coral rag.
   Coral Rag.—This formation is found to basset regularly in a band of greater or less width on the west of each of the hills above described as having its escarpment formed principally by the Oxford clay. From the point at which that formation entirely disappears (as just stated) beneath the coral rag, the latter occupies the valley of the Liane to a considerable elevation on both sides of the river, till it arrives within about two miles of Boulogne. It passes also under the eminence on which Samer, on the Paris road, is situated, beyond which it is covered up by the lower greensand.
   Kimmeridge Clay.—This formation succeeds in ascending order. North of Amble- teuse it occupies a narrow tract along the coast. On the south of the river it extends from the coast by Maninghen to the east of Hesdres, over the high ground which intervenes between the Ambleteuse and the Wimereux rivers. And on the south of the latter it extends in like manner from the coast into the For6t de Boulogne, and occupies the heights immediately to the north of that part of the valley of the Liane along which runs the Paris road, the sides of the valley itself being occupied by the coral rag, as before stated. The most eastern point to which it proceeds is Samer. The insulated hill on which that place is situated is capped by some of its lower beds, distinctly characterized by the Gryphcea virgula, and resting on the coral rag which forms the base of the hill (as already mentioned), and extends to the valley of the Liane. On the south of the Liane it extends from the coast in a similar manner, till the coral rag emerges from beneath it, or it becomes concealed by the unconformable covering of lower greensand.
   This formation is best exhibited in the coast section immediately to the north of Boulogne. The lower division consists of a species of blue marl, with not unfrequent hard stony bands, and is for the most part filled with the remains of the Gryphcea virgula. The upper portion consists of a similar blue marl, frequently somewhat shaly, and containing the Gryphcea virgula in much smaller quantity. It contains however in considerable numbers a Gryphcea which appears to me a distinct species, and has not, I think, been yet named. This portion is also characterized by the Ostrea deltoidea, of which I never observed a specimen in the lower portion of the formation. These two parts are separated by thick continuous bands of sandstone frequently characterized by large Trigonia (Diagrams Nos. 27, 28, 30.). They descend to the level of the sea at La Creche (Diagram No. 28.), and furnish the enormous blocks on the beach at that point. It is by means of these distinct divisions of this formation that we are enabled to make out the geological structure, where most complicated, with a degree of accuracy which would otherwise be unattainable.


   Structure of the District near the Coast.—Commencing with the coast section from Boulogne (Diagram No. 28.) and proceeding northward, we observe that the stony bands which separate the two portions of the Kimmeridge clay are brought down from the top of the cliff to the beach, by a rapid curvature of the beds, at La Creche. These beds then dip beneath the level of the sea, and the cliff, from that place to the mouth of the Wimereux, is composed, in its lower part, of the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay, the higher portion of the cliff consisting of the superincumbent sandstone beds above described. In this part of the cliff there is a considerable dip to the north which carries the upper surface of the Kimmeridge clay below the level of the sea at the dunes at the mouth of the Wimereux. On the north of the dunes, however, the upper division of that formation is found at a considerable altitude. It afterwards descends again with a gentle dip to the north beneath the Ambleteuse dunes. It ranges also to the eastward along the north side of the valley of the Wimereux, where it may be distinctly traced nearly as far as the Calais road, ascending by the gentle eastward rise of the beds nearly to the top of the hill. I identified it at the mouth of the Wimereux and also near the Calais road by the deltoid oyster; and moreover, near to the village of Wimille, the lower bed of Kimmeridge clay is distinctly recognised in the lower part of the valley by the abundance of the Gryphcea virgula. Returning to the top of the cliff at La Creche, we find distinct evidence of the continuance, in a direction parallel to the Wimereux, of the line of flexure of which the section is so beautifully exhibited in the cliff. The junction of the upper sand on the north with the lower Kimmeridge clay on the south, which marks the course of the line, may be distinctly traced close by the fort near La Creche, to the north of the column of Napoleon, into the upper part of the valley of the little river Denacq. In some part of this range it probably becomes a line of fault.
   On the north of this line it is easy to trace the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay with the superincumbent upper sand down to the valley of the Wimereux (to which it descends in the same manner as in the cliff) and also to the Denacq. The windmill about three-quarters of a mile from Wimereux, on the Boulogne road, stands on the clay (Diagram No. 29.), which also appears at the little hamlet north of the column, whence it passes northward under the quarries in the upper sand near that spot. In a quarry also near to Wimille, and between the great road and the Denacq, the beds of that formation are found to dip rapidly into the valley. Hence then the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay passes into the bottom of the valley of the Wimereux on its southern side, while on the northern side, as already shown, it occupies nearly the top of the hill. Consequently there must be a very large fault ranging along that valley from the coast to the village of Wimille (Diagram No. 29.).

  The top of Mont Lambert is the highest point within a considerable distance of Boulogne. The extensive quarries near its summit are easily recognised as belonging to the upper sand. In descending in any direction we soon arrive at the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay, and along the road to Boulogne the siliceous beds beneath it are distinctly seen. These descend the hill on the north side across the St. Omer road down to the upper part of the valley of the Denacq, already noticed as ranging with the La Creche line of elevation, where I found them near the upper extremity of the valley abutting directly against the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay (Diagram No. 30.). This distinctly proves the continuation of the La Creche line up to this point. It probably dies away somewhat east of it.
  At the point just mentioned the clay was identified by the oyster shells; and, moreover, I traced it along the brow of the hill on the east of the valley of the Denacq, which shows that a great fault also ranges along the lower part of that valley down to Wimille, since it has been shown that the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay passes down to the bottom of the valley on its western side.
  When the clay on the east side of the valley of the Denacq meets the valley of the Wimereux, it ranges along its south side at the same elevation. It also constitutes the hill on the north side of the valley nearly to the summit immediately east of the Calais road; consequently we have no longer the same evidence of a great fault ranging along this valley east of Wimille, as on the west of that place. There are evidences of disturbance, however, on the north side of the valley. South of Maninghen I found the beds in a newly-opened pit dipping very rapidly to the north. About Souvremoulin there wTere indications of cross fractures, by which the lower beds of the Kimmeridge clay are brought nearer the bottom of the valley than either to the east or west of that place. I have no doubt therefore that the dislocation, in which the valley west of Wimille undoubtedly originated, was continued to the east of that place. It probably dies away towards the upper part of the valley in the same manner as in the La Creche line.
  From the high ground north of the Wimereux, and between the coast and the Calais road, the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay may be traced, gradually descending towards the Ambleteuse valley as in the coast section, the declination of the strata in that direction however being less, as far as I could judge, at points more remote from the coast. At Auxdresselles, the northern extremity of the Ambleteuse dunes, we find some hard siliceous beds rising from beneath the valley, and apparently also from beneath the upper division of the Kimmeridge clay. The portion at the level of the beach being disintegrated by the waves, leaves the shore strewed with enormous blocks, exactly similar to those which are found also on the beach at La Creche, and they belong, I conceive, to the same bed. North of Auxdresselles, the dip, as seen in the cliff, is to the south, which shows the valley to be here formed by a synclinal arrangement of the beds, since on the south of the valley the dip is northerly. The same arrangement is also maintained more to the east, as shown by the section (Diagram No. 30.) of the hill at Basinghen already described. On the east of Marquise the valley is bounded by the older formations, and a transverse section of it is altogether different.
   I have already mentioned the general structure of Mont Lambert near Boulogne. The hill appears to have originated in a local disturbance. On the side towards Bainctun, the beds dip very rapidlv into the hill, an arrangement of the strata which brings up the coral rag at the foot of the hill, and the Oxford clay in the valley at Bainctun as shown in Diagram No. 27. The general dip of the hill on the western side is small and towards the coast. On the north it has already been stated that the dip is with the general declination of the surface in that direction.
   On the south of the Liane there are no indications of distinct lines of elevation.
   In the portion of the Bas Boulonnais more remote from the sea, and occupied by the oolites, the indications of elevatory movements are much less sensible than in the tract already described. I was not able there to trace the lines of elevation above described to points more remote from the coast than those above indicated. There is, however, some evidence of a transverse dislocation close to the borders of the chalk near Henneveux, which is perhaps deserving of mention. It has been stated in a former part of this paper, in tracing the course of the Oxford clay, that the hill on which Alinctun is situated projects its eastern escarpment as far east as Henneveux and Brunembert, very near to the opposite chalk escarpment. It appeared to me probable that the Oxford clay dipped with some rapidity to pass under the chalk. This must necessarily be the case if the present difference of elevation between the top of the Oxford clay escarpment and the bottom of that of the chalk was produced by the elevatory movement which took place after the deposition of the oolites. Assuming this to be true, there must here be a transverse line of flexure, such as would almost necessarily be attended by a corresponding dislocation. Such a fracture is indicated by a deep valley which cuts directly across the high plateau of Oxford clay near its eastern extremity. The course of the valley is marked by a small stream which falls into the Liane near the village of Bournonville. It would be extremely difficult to account for it, I conceive, in any other manner. Still, it is possible, though I think improbable, that the surface of the Oxford clay might have been approximately the same as at present before the unconformable deposition of the cretaceous system, in which case its actual configuration may have been due to denudation, and not to elevation.
   Structure of the North-eastern Portion of the District.—This is the tract occupied by the carboniferous and older formations. An account of its structure is in some measure foreign to my present object, since it must be almost entirely independent of the elevatory movement which led to the denudation of the district. I shall only offer one or two remarks on the subject. The surface of this portion of the district forms a rather elevated plateau bounded by the chalk hills on the north, and by the river which runs by Marquise on the south. On the north side the beds dip very rapidly to the south. The surface of the southern boundary is covered up by a thin covering of the unconformable oolites, but in one part I found a clear section of the inferior beds, which showed them dipping very rapidly and regularly to the north. If such be the case along the whole southern boundary (as I think extremely probable), the central portion of these older formations must lie in a synclinal trough. The dip is there very irregular, and generally much less than on the northern boundary, or at the point where I observed it on the southern limit. These facts are easily accounted for by the structure now described.
§ 2. THEORY OF THE ELEVATION OF THE DISTRICT.
  The special object of this second section of my memoir is the comparison of the phsenomena above described with the conclusions drawn from the theory of elevation as given in the Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society; but I shall also avail myself of this opportunity of developing several points of that theory more in detail, and of offering such elucidations of the whole subject as the example before us may afford. In doing this I shall add somewhat to the mechanical reasoning hitherto employed ; but, generally, those parts of the memoir in which we are not engaged in the immediate application of one theory to the district before us, will consist rather of more detailed explanations of fundamental hypotheses and final results, than of the mechanical reasoning, for which I must refer the reader to the memoir just alluded to.
  1. In any accurate researches on this subject, based on mechanical principles, some hypotheses must necessarily be made respecting the constitution of the elevated mass and the action of the elevatory force. In the memoir above referred to, I have obtained the general results, assuming, for the greater simplicity, the cohesive power of the mass to be uniform throughout, and have then shown in what other cases those results would still be accurately or approximately true. The cohesion may have varied continuously according to any law and in any degree, in passing from one point of the mass to another; or it may have varied discontinuously along any vertical line within the mass, as for instance, in passing from one horizontal bed to the contiguous one. In these cases the general results will still be accurately true, so far at least as we are now concerned with them. I have also shown what modifications would be produced in the phaenomena by the existence of planes or surfaces within the mass, irregular in position and of partial extent, along which the cohesive power may be much smaller than in the immediately contiguous portions of the mass. They may be termed surfaces of discontinuity, and consist of irregular joints and cracks formed in the process of solidification, or by partial disturbance previous to the general action of the elevatory force, the effects of which are to be investigated. In such cases the lines of elevation (the phienomena with which we are here principally concerned), instead of being straight or regularly curved, will be broken or zigzag lines or curves; but their general directions will be approximately the same as if the mass were uniform. Such will also be the case if the mass be regularly jointed in several directions. If it be jointed in two directions only, the mean line of fracture will be made to deviate more or less from the direction it would take if the mass were homogeneous, towards that of the system of joints with which the fracture makes the least angle, but still always tending to resume the direction it would have in the homogeneous mass, whenever the continuity of the joints is interrupted.
  With respect to the elevatory force, it is assumed that it acted simultaneously throughout the disturbed area, with an intensity which might approximate to uniformity for large portions of that area, while it might be greater at particular points of it.
  2. I have called the force elevatory, because the general character of most disturbed districts seems to indicate that the subterranean force, tending to elevate the earth’s crust, has predominated over its weight tending to depress it; but if we suppose the contrary to have been the case, and the effect to have been a depression of the mass acted on, the phaenomena with which we are principally concerned, the lines of dislocation, will follow the same law as if the mass had been elevated. It is only necessary that the resultant force at each point should generally be nearly vertical, i. e. nearly perpendicular to the upper and lower surfaces of the mass in its undisturbed position. I shall always speak of it, however, as elevatory.
  3. We are not directly concerned in this theory with the physical cause to which the existence of an elevatory force may be due. Our object is to account for the varied phaenomena of elevation, by referring them to some simple and general mechanical action ; and, in so doing, to consider how far we maybe able to define the nature of that action ; whether it may have been general or local; and whether the resulting effects may be attributable to many repeated efforts, or to few. To give the greater definiteness, however, to our conception of the mechanical action here assumed, we may observe that it is exactly that which would be produced on a nearly horizontal surface by the pressure of a fluid, the action of which, being perpendicular to the surface, would be nearly vertical.
   4. In applying this theory to any proposed district, we have first to consider whether the elevatory force (which, according to our fundamental hypothesis, has acted simultaneously at every point of the lower surface of the uplifted mass,) has acted with the same or with a different intensity on different portions of that surface. If the force acted under any continuous portion of the mass with a greater intensity than under another such portion, the former would, cceteris paribus, be more elevated and disturbed than the latter; and assuming the undisturbed positions of the component strata and the external surface to have been originally horizontal, the position of any stratum, or that of the surface immediately posterior to its elevation, and anterior to any subsequent subsidence, would indicate these two portions of the elevated mass. In determining them by observation, we must necessarily assume the external configuration of the proposed district, (independently of subsequent denudation), and the disturbed forms of the strata, to retain in a certain degree the characters impressed on them by that decisive movement» to which our theory may refer the more characteristic phaenomena of elevation. As an elucidation, let us take the tract of country with which we are here concerned, including the Bas Boulonnais and nearly the whole of that portion of England lying south of the Thames, and extending to the west of the Wiltshire Downs; and let us assume, for the moment, that every part of this tract was elevated simultaneously; and for the greater simplicity of the elucidation, we may also suppose it to have received its whole elevation at a single movement. To judge of the relative elevations of different portions of it immediately after this movement, we must consider what would be the form of the external surface at the present time if no denudation had taken place. For this purpose we must conceive the tertiary beds to extend over the whole of this tract (since the elevation took place •posterior to their deposition), as represented in the accompanying diagrams. The first (No. 7) represents a general section across the Weald, from north to south ; the second (No. 8) a similar section west of the Wealden denudation; and the third (No. 9) a longitudinal section along the axis of the whole district from the Bas Boulonnais to the west of the Wiltshire Downs.	
  It thus appears that if there had been no denudation, we should have had an elevated range, the base of which would have occupied the whole of the tract defined above. The height of different portions of this range would have been very different. Within the boundary of the Wealden denudation, the greatest elevation above the sea would have been equal to the actual height of the central portion of the district together with the thickness of all the beds superior to the Hastings sand up to the tertiaries inclusive. This would probably have amounted to not less than 4000 feet, while the elevation of the western part of the range would perhaps not have exceeded 2000 feet, being its present height together with the thickness of the tertiaries.
   For the purpose of presenting more distinctly to the mind the actual amount of elevation in this tract, I have supposed the tertiaries and the inferior formations now wanting to have been once continuous over the whole surface of the district. It would manifestly, however, answer our purpose equally well, if, instead of comparing the elevation of this imaginary surface of the tertiaries with their actual surface in the surrounding country, we should take the surface of any continuous stratum, and compare its elevation within the disturbed district with its depression beneath the actual surface of the surrounding district. The relative elevation of each stratum, real or imaginary, taken with reference to its undisturbed position beyond the bounds of the disturbed district, will be the same, and may be termed ' the geological elevation of the district, in contradistinction to the actual elevation of its existing surface.
  Taking, then, the whole disturbed tract as above defined, since the geological elevation of the Wealden portion of it, with the Bas Boulonnais, is so much greater than that of the remaining portion generally, it is concluded, in the application of our theory, that the elevatory force acted with greater general intensity in the former than in the latter part of the district. It is also concluded, that the intensity of the elevatory force, throughout the district of greater geological elevation, so far at least approximated to uniformity, that its variation was generally much less rapid in passing from one point to another within the boundary of this portion of the whole tract, than in passing from a point within to another without that boundary.
  The hypothesis of a single elevatory movement introduced, as above stated, for the greater distinctness of elucidation, is not essential to this reasoning. If we suppose the whole elevation to have been produced by successive movements, we must then apply the conclusion of the preceding paragraph more especially to that particular decisive effort of the elevatory force to which we refer the characteristic phenomena of the district.
  5. The next point in the application of this theory is the determination of the boundary of the district which may have been simultaneously disturbed. This must be effected by ascertaining the area throughout which the phenomena of elevation are distinctly characterized by the same laws. Thus in the case with which we are immediately concerned, we observe that, in the western portion of the Wealden district, the longitudinal lines of elevation run approximately east and west; and such is also known to be the case in the Yale of Pewsey, and again in the Vale of Wardour. The great dislocation likewise of the Isle of Wight and the Isle of Purbeck preserves a parallel direction ; and, although the evidence may not be so determinate as in the Weald, Mr. Martin has lately shown that intermediate lines, some of which may be regarded as continuations of those from the Weald into the great Wiltshire plateau of chalk, approximate to the same general law of parallelism. Hence I conclude that the boundary of the tract subjected to the simultaneous action of the elevatory forces is exterior to, and not remote from, the chalk escarpment of the Bas Boulonnais ; and, after passing across the Channel from the north of Wisant to the east of Folkstone, that it is continued in like manner exterior to the chalk escarpment of Kent and Surrey, till it comes to the north of the Hog’s Back and Farnham, whence I conceive it to be continued westward parallel to the general direction of the valley of the Thames, and probably not far from it (as shown by the discontinuous line in the map), as far at least as the Vale of Pewsey. On the south I consider this tract to be bounded by a line south of the southern coast of this country (see map), the exact position of which we have not the means of ascertaining; and on the west there is also some indeterminateness, arising partly from the absence of more detailed observations, and partly from the interference of other systems of dislocation which may have originated in independent elevatory movements in the south-western portion of this country. If all the strata removed by denudation were replaced, the above boundary, with the exception of the western extremity, would be distinctly indicated by the resulting mountain range.
  6. To define the boundary of that portion of the district which is conceived to have been subjected to a more intense action of the elevatory force than the other portions, we must suppose the boundary line to turn southward at Farnham, and to preserve the same relation to the chalk escarpment from thence by Petersfield to Beachy Head, as that above described with reference to the other portions of that escarpment, and to pass across the Channel from that point to the southern boundary of the Bas Boulonnais. The boundary of the portion of the district now referred to is indicated in the map by a discontinuous line, which will be easily recognised.
  Having established these preliminary points respecting the action of the elevatory force and the boundaries of the disturbed district, we must determine the general directions of lines of dislocation which wTould be formed in the elevated mass, assuming its approximate homogeneity. If it be not homogeneous, the lines of fracture may be modified as previously explained (page 31), but the results will still be approximately true.
  7. It has been shown in the memoir already referred to, in the Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, that if the elevatory force be uniform, and the boundary of the elevated area be circular, a system of fissures might be formed, concentric about the centre, or diverging as radii from it. If the force acted with much greater intensity at the centre than elsewhere, the latter system would generally be formed, and not the former. It would then become a case of what I have termed conical elevation. If the circle be of large extent, and the force approximately uniform and of sufficient intensity, both these systems might be formed in a mass constituted like that we have to consider. If, on the contrary, the elevated area were a parallelogram of finite breadth, but .of indefinite length, one system of fissures only could be formed. Its direction would be parallel to the axis of the parallelogram.
  Now the circle, and the parallelogram of indefinite length, may be regarded as the two extreme or limiting cases of the ellipse, or, more generally, of any regular oval. For conceive an oval always preserving its shorter axis the same in magnitude and position, to change its form by a change in the magnitude of its greater axis. When this variable axis is equal to the constant one, the oval will become circular; and when the variable axis becomes indefinitely great, the oval will approximate more and more nearly to two straight lines parallel to the greater axis and passing through the extremities of the minor one. And as the general form of the oval is intermediate to these two extreme or limiting cases, it is not difficult to see, that the curve along which a longitudinal fissure would be formed under our assumed conditions, when the boundary of the elevated mass is oval, will be generally intermediate to the straight line and circle, in the sense in which the oval is so. In the particular case in which the fissure should be central, it would be a straight line along the axis ; if lateral, it would deviate more from the straight line and approximate more to the form of the external oval boundary, according as the position of the fissure should be more remote from the axis, as represented in the following diagram (No. 10). The conditions of symmetry are sufficient to
establish these results, without entering into the mechanical reasoning on which they really depend.
  A system of transverse fissures (a /3, y h, &c.) might also be formed, the law of which, as theoretically determined, would be, that every such fissure should be perpendicular to each longitudinal fissure at the point of intersection.
  Let us now take the case represented in No. 11, in which the extremity, A, of the disturbed district has the same form as in the previous case, while the portions B C and B'C' of the boundary are continued indefinitely and parallel to each other.
Towards A, the longitudinal lines of fissure will evidently be curved, as in fig. 4; but between B C and B' C', they will be parallel to those lines. The transverse fissures, if formed, will always follow the same general law with reference to the longitudinal fissures as in the previous case.
  Again, let us take the case formed by a combination of the two preceding cases, the portion ABA'B' (No. 12) being supposed to be acted on by an elevatory force of greater intensity than the remaining portion. Let F denote the force acting on this latter portion, and let that on the former be equal to the sum of F and an additional force (/). If F alone acted on the whole area, we should have the case of fig. 11 ; and the question is, how would the fissures of that case be modified by the contemporaneous action of/, in addition to F, on the oval AB A' B' ? Now if /acted alone on that portion, and F did not act at all, either in that or the other part of the district, we should have the case of fig. 10, and therefore it is obvious that the modification produced by it would be such as to make the lines of fig. 11 approximate more or less to those of fig. 10, in the manner represented in fig. 12, the direction of a fissure through any point situated like P being intermediate to those in which it would proceed through that point in the two preceding cases respectively.
   This conclusion follows immediately also from the consideration that the direction of the longitudinal fissures at any point will be perpendicular to the direction of greatest tension at that point*. Thus, if the force acted uniformly throughout the whole space A C C', the direction of greatest tension at the point P would be q q' perpendicular to the axis A A'; and if the force acted on the oval alone, the direction of greatest tension would be in some such direction as r r'. Consequently, in the actual case proposed, it is obvious that the greatest tension will have a direction p p', intermediate to the two former directions, and therefore also, the direction of the fissure will be intermediate to those which would be formed in the previous cases respectively.

We may now pass to the case represented in fig. 13, which differs from fig. 12 in having for the axis of the oval a curved instead of a straight line. To estimate the effect produced by this change of form on the direction of the longitudinal fissures, conceive the area AB A' B' uplifted and thus placed in that state.of tension which it can just support without dislocation. If we take a point Q in the portion BAB' of the oval, it is not difficult to see that the line of greatest tension through Q must (to a degree of approximation sufficient for our present purpose) bear the same relation to the curved axis of the oval, as the corresponding line through Q' in fig. 12 bears to the rectilinear axis in that case. Consequently the directions of longitudinal fissures through Q and Q' (which must be perpendicular to the lines of greatest tension) must also bear similar relations to the two axes respectively. Consequently the line of fissure through Q, instead of curving upwards as in fig. 12, may curve downwards, as represented in fig. 13, provided the curvature of the axis be sufficiently great. The curvature of the lines of dislocation on the side of the axis opposite to Q will evidently be increased by that of the axis. A fissure near the axis will obviously be approximately parallel to it.
  In the preceding diagrams, I have represented, for the sake of simplicity, only one central and two lateral longitudinal fissures ; but I have shown in the memoir so often referred to, that under very probable conditions, instead of a single continuous fissure, we should have several parallel fissures ; so that if, for instance, Ave take the simple case of a uniform mass, of which the surface is a parallelogram of indefinite length, elevated by a uniform force, we should have a system of fissures such as represented in the annexed diagram (14). It should be observed, that we cannot possibly know sufficiently the exact conditions of the problem to determine the precise position of each individual fissure; but we know that every longitudinal fissure must, in this case, be parallel to the sides of the parallelogram, and that thus the whole system must possess the distinctive character of parallelism.
  In like manner we may replace the longitudinal fissures of fig. 13 by any other system in which the direction of each fissure, or rather the curve line in which it meets the surface, shall be in accordance with the law distinctly indicated by that diagram. Thus we may take the system represented in fig. 15, where, instead of a single central longitudinal fissure, we have several, and where the lateral fissure ef (fig. 13) is replaced by two, e e' and/'/. The law of this system is no longer that of strict parallelism, nor can it be simply described. It is one, however, which is obvious to the eye, and must characterize the whole system formed under the conditions contemplated in this case, whatever may be the position of the individual fissures with respect to their distances from the sides or extremities of the district. Of the different systems which might be thus formed and characterized by this law, I have selected one in fig. 15 bearing a close resemblance with the actual district under consideration, to facilitate the comparison between this theoretical diagram and the observed phaenomena. The boundary A B' C' has also been varied from fig. 13 for the same purpose. The system of transverse fissures is represented by the transverse lines.
  8. To bring the results of our theoretical investigation to an actual comparison with those of observation, I have further to remark, that, according to our theory, all the secondary phaenomena of elevation, such as faults, anticlinal lines, lines of curvature, &c., are the immediate consequences of the primary phaenomena of fissures, and must, therefore, follow corresponding laws. Hence the lines, representing fissures in fig. 15, may represent the corresponding lines of elevation, such as constitute the objects of direct observation. To test the accuracy of our theory,

then, as applied to the Wealden district, we have only to compare our theoretical diagram (15) with the map on which the observed lines of elevation are delineated.
   In doing this, we may, in the first place, direct attention to the central system of observed longitudinal lines. We have not one line, but many, all of which have the same curvature as the geometrical axis of the district; and we may remark that the three lines of the Bas Boulonnais have exactly the directions they ought to have, if considered as the prolongation of the central system across the Channel. All this is in accurate accordance with our theoretical diagram. Nor is the Green- hurst line less curiously accordant with the line ef (fig. 15)*. The line by Seven Oaks and Farnham agrees with the theoretical line c d and the line g h also becomes almost the exact representative of the well-known line of the Isle of Pur- beck and the Isle of Wight. The central transverse system of fractures follows the theoretical law, as do the fractures also of the chalk escarpment, assuming its transverse river-courses to have originated in such fractures, and the directions of dislocation to coincide with the direction in which the actual rivers penetrate the chalk. It will be observed that the courses of the Wey and the Mole through the northern escarpment are very nearly north and south, while those of the Darent, the Medway and the Stour incline successively more to the north-east as the general axis of the district, and the central longitudinal lines incline to the southeast. This is exactly in accordance with our theoretical deductions; and though we have no right to cite this harmony as one of the proofs of the theory, in the same manner as if the origin of each river-course in a dislocation had been established by more positive evidence, we may insist upon it as affording strong corroboration of this view of their origin, and of the theory by which we are accounting for it.
  The only sensible deviations from the directions which our calculations assign to the lines of elevation are found in a few of the transverse fractures, more especially in the Seven Oaks ridge, which appear to bear somewhat more to the north-east than the corresponding lines in the theoretical diagram (15). These latter lines, it will be recollected, are determined on the supposition that the structure of the elevated mass has been such as to exercise no sensible influence on the directions of the lines of elevation. It is not, however, contended that the hypothesis is necessarily true. The extent to which it must be received in any particular district, is to be determined by the degree of accordance between the observed and calculated results. The almost perfect accordance in the case before us affords the most conclusive proof that can be offered, of the general truth of the supposition in this particular instance; but in those localities where we observe a want of this perfect accordance, we must necessarily recognise the operation of some modifying cause. The transverse fissures just mentioned present an instance of the kind; and the modifying cause was probably the jointed structure of the mass in the locality in which they exist; for it appeared to me that the predominant joints in the neighbourhood were such as would be likely to produce exactly the kind of modification recognised in the directions of the transverse dislocations.
   And here we may remark, that the great tendency of an approximately uniform elevatory force, in a tract of which the length is much greater than the breadth, would be to produce longitudinal fissures, since the directions of greatest tension would manifestly be perpendicular to the longer axis of the district, except at its extremities. The formation of transverse fissures might, in such cases, be due, in a considerable degree, to local irregularities in the action of the elevatory force, or in the constitution of the mass. The longitudinal fissures would be formed first, and their prior existence would, in a great measure, determine the directions of the transverse fissures, whether the latter were formed at the next instant during the same elevatory movement, or at any subsequent movement. This cause, however, as respects its influence in fixing the directions of the transverse fissures, would frequently be less determinate than the general action of the elevatory force, in fixing those of the longitudinal fissures; and, therefore, while the latter might remain sensibly unaffected, the former might be materially modified by the irregularities above mentioned in the action of the force, or in the constitution of the mass. Such modifying causes must necessarily exist in all cases ; but we can have no means of calculating their effects. In some instances they might be sufficient to destroy all symmetry and apparent law in the resulting phsenomena; but in the instance before us, the accordance between observed and calculated results assures us that the influence of merely local causes has been extremely small.
   In this harmony between facts and theory we observe something more than a first approximation to accuracy. If nothing more had been established by observation than that there were certain lines of elevation of which the general directions approximated to east and west, and others which were directed nearly to the north and south, and a theory had been offered assigning some probable cause for this law of parallelism, such theory might have been deserving of attention as a first and rough approximation to a more accurate one. But the theory which I have been applying to the Wealden district does not stop at this point. It not only assigns a physical cause for the general law of parallelism, but, wherever the data of the problem are sufficiently determinate, it shows the manner in which the lines of elevation will deviate from this parallelism in each particular district. In the case before us, the deviations of the longitudinal lines from rectilinearity and from accurate parallelism with each other, according to theory, have been distinctly pointed out, as well as the manner in which the transverse lines are related to the longitudinal ones, and their consequent deviation also from accurate parallelism. The exact accordance of these deviations with those which I have established by observation in the Wealden district constitutes the most complete proof which a theory of elevation can admit of in its application to any district in which we can observe little more than the lines of elevation, and have no means of examining those more minute details of geological structure which the operations of the miner alone can lay open to us.
   9. One conclusion from this theory is, that the whole tract previously defined as extending from the Bas Boulonnais to the south-western part of England was raised by a force acting contemporaneously at every point of the lower surface of the elevated mass, for that hypothesis has been proved sufficient to account for the observed phsenomena. Moreover, it is necessary ; for if this were not the case, conceive this area divided into separate portions, each of which was elevated separately. Then, since it has been shown that the form of the area simultaneously elevated is one of the most essential circumstances on which the directions of dislocation depend, it is manifest that those directions would follow different laws in the different portions successively elevated, which is contrary to the observed phaenomena.
   10. There is another point of interest on which our theory does not enable us to arrive at an equally demonstrative conclusion : I allude to the question respecting the manner in which the district may have attained its actual geological elevation ; whether by one great upheaval, or by many successive minor ones. The only demonstrative inference to which our theory leads us is this,—that there must have been one considerable decisive and simultaneous movement by which the dislocations of the elevated mass were produced; and I should further regard it as highly probable that this movement was sufficient to impress upon the district its most distinctive and characteristic features, as far as they depend on its geological elevation. I shall not here, however, enter into a discussion of the mere probabilities of the question, for which, in fact, a theory of the denudation of the district is scarcely less essential than that of its elevation. I will only observe, that while we are compelled, as I conceive, to recognise the decisive movement above described, considerations connected with the denudation of the district equally constrain us to recognise in it the slow process of continental elevation.
   11. Our theory also leads us to the inference, that extensive cavities formerly existed within the solid portion of the earth’s crust, and, if not always, were at least sometimes filled with fluid or gaseous matter, to the expansion of which the elevation and fracture of the superincumbent solid crust is to be attributed. Elevation and fracture might undoubtedly be produced by the expansion of a solid mass immediately beneath the superficial crust, but the phsenomena of faults, in which the beds on one side of a dislocation are frequently raised to so considerable a height above the corresponding beds on the other, would manifestly not result from this kind of expansion ; and therefore it is concluded that the elevation must have been owing to the expansion of a fluid or gaseous mass, since there appears to be no other conceivable mode of producing the elevatory force. I shall now endeavour to explain how we may distinctly conceive the requisite mechanical action to have resulted from this agency.
   It will be recollected, that in the investigations by which the effects of elevatory forces have been determined, the elevated mass has been assumed to be fixed at each point of its boundary,—a condition which is manifestly satisfied by the hypothesis of an internal cavity, co-extensive with the surface of the elevated district. If the observed phsenomena be such as are referable to an approximately uniform action of the elevatory force, they will only require the hypothesis of a continuous and uninterrupted cavity, occupied by matter possessing the property of fluidity in a very considerable, though not necessarily in a perfect degree. In general, however, the phsenomena indicate a more energetic action in particular portions of the disturbed district, and in such cases some additional considerations become necessary. For the greater simplicity, I have usually considered these phsenomena as due to a more intense action of the elevatory force, the resistance of the uplifted mass being uniform. This resistance, however, may be different in different portions of the mass, and the resulting effect will then depend not merely on the intensity of the elevatory force, but on the ratio which that intensity bears to the resistance opposed to it; so that the effects will be the same, whether the force be variable and the resistance uniform, or the converse. Thus, for instance, the greater geological elevation of the Wealden district as compared with that of the other portion generally of the whole disturbed tract, might be referred to a smaller resistance of the uplifted mass ; to account for which, we have only to suppose a certain portion of the superior beds which are now wanting in that district, not to have existed there at the epoch of its elevation. The absence of this superincumbent weight, conjoined with a uniform force throughout the whole disturbed tract, would manifestly be equivalent to the action of a greater force beneath that portion of the district, conjoined with a uniform mass ; and the phcenomena of elevation would in either case be sensibly the same.
   If we would refer a greater relative geological elevation to a greater intensity of the elevatory force, it may be desirable (though not essential to our immediate object, as stated in Art. 3.} to explain how that intensity might be greater in one part of the internal cavity than in another, notwithstanding the tendency of a fluid to exert an equal pressure in all directions. ' For this purpose we may first suppose the fluidity of the matter contained in the cavity to have been imperfect, like that, for example, of newly ejected lava ; or, secondly, we may suppose the communication between one continuous portion of the cavity and the contiguous portions not to have been perfectly free, but partially impeded by solid masses, capable of resisting fusion at the temperature of the surrounding matter. The whole general cavity might thus consist of several portions, with obstructed communications, like a number of lakes connected by comparatively narrow or shallow channels. Under such conditions, if any cause of expansion were to act with greater intensity on the fluid contained within one of these internal lakes, the fluid pressure throughout it might be approximately uniform, and much greater than that transmitted by the imperfect fluid through impeded channels to the surrounding lakes. We should thus obtain that kind of action of the elevatorv force which, as above shown, the phaenomena of the Weald require for their explanation
  -12. Other suppositions respecting the structure of internal cavities might also enable us to account for the existence of a fluid pressure, acting with different intensities on different portions of the elevated mass. It is not, however, my object at present to enter further into speculations of this nature ; nor is it here necessary for us to consider to which of these hypotheses the greatest probability of truth may attach, or whether the greater observed elevation of such a district as the Weald may have been due to the more intense action of the elevatory force, or the greater weakness of that portion of the elevated crust. It is enough to have shown that the hypothesis of internal cavities does enable us to assign a distinct and simple cause for the mechanical action necessary to account for such phaenomena of elevation as we find in the Weald and in other analogous districts.
  I shall not, by here touching upon other points of our theory, lengthen a communication which has already exceeded the limits I had intended to prescribe to it. This has arisen from an anxiety to avail myself of the occasion afforded by the admirable example before us, to elucidate the fundamental points and some of the. more important results of the theory in its application to the Weald and all similar districts. I have thus hoped also to correct some imperfect, if not erroneous conceptions which have been entertained on this subject, whether they may have arisen from an imperfect development of my own views, on my part, or an imperfect comprehension of the- conventional meaning of the language I have used, on the part of the reader. Such conventional language must necessarily appertain to every branch of science, nor can it be perfectly understood without a clear knowledge of, at least, the fundamental principles and simpler applications of the science to which it belongs. Thus it may happen that expressions which are strictly calculated to convey perfectly accurate notions of the reasoning employed or the results arrived at, may, when addressed to persons imperfectly acquainted with the language of the subject, convey conceptions either positively erroneous, or at least devoid of that distinctness and precision without which they become comparatively valueless. Such, perhaps, is especially the case in the application of mechanical science to the problems which geology presents to us. In these problems, approximate solutions only can be sought for; and the sense in which the language of mechanics, as an accurate science, is constantly used, can only be completely understood by those who can understand, from the nature of the problem proposed, the degree of approximation which may be attainable in its solution. In some instances it must be impossible to obviate this difficulty on the part of the reader ; in others it could only be done by a verbal prolixity, which might justly be deemed intolerable in a communication to a scientific body. Under the impression however, that many geologists who have not devoted their attention to mechanical science might feel an interest in these theoretical views on geological elevation, I have ventured, in this memoir, to give such repetitions of former statements and such detailed explanations as may tend to render the subject more generally intelligible. Should this object be accomplished, it will be deemed, I trust, a sufficient apology for the want of that greater brevity which it is generally desirable to maintain in original communications on scientific subjects.

Description of the preceding Sections.
  Of these sections the first (16) exhibits, near its southern extremity, the line of flexure which Mr. Martin is disposed to consider as the continuation of the Greenhurst anticlinal line. At its northern extremity it is intended, in conjunction with (17), to show the great change which takes place in the dip of the chalk after we pass the western extremity of the Hog’s Back, as mentioned in the description of this part of the district. Section 18, at its northern end, exhibits the Weald clay just appearing at the surface in Peasemarsh, as described by Dr. Fitton and Mr. Martin. The latter gentleman considers his Peasemarsh line as running from thence through Crooksbury Hill. The southern end of this section exhibits the Greenhurst line, with the patch of gault to the north of it, as well as the line of flexure which I have described as passing from Pulborough to Trotton Common. Section 19 shows the manner in which the rapid dip is continued to the top of Margaret’s Chapel Hill, and, together with (20) and (21), shows the continuation of the great line of flexure near the chalk escarpment of the North Downs. Section 20 also exhibits the Greenhurst anticlinal at the point where it brings up the Weald clay in a valley of elevation. Section 21 exhibits the Crowborough and Cuck- field anticlinals. Section 22, at its northern end, shows the Seven Oaks line, and at its southern end the Lewes anticlinal, supposed to be a continuation of the Greenhurst line. This section and (23) also exhibit the Bidborough and Brenchley line, which is generally a line of flexure, but assumes the anticlinal arrangement at Brenchley Hill. In the latter section we also recognise the Frant, Wadhurst and Brightling lines. Section 24 exhibits the two distinct anticlinals through Battle and St. John’s Cross, into which the Brightling appears to be divided to the east of Brightling. Section 25 is perpendicular to the Battle and Bexhill lines, exhibiting the fault in the low sea-clifls near Bexhill.
  In the lengths of these sections the scale of the Ordnance Map, one inch to the mile, has been reduced to a depth of an inch to the mile. In the heights no topographical accuracy has been aimed at. The object has been to give a clear conception of the character of the phaenomena of elevation which the district presents.

Description of the Sections of the Bas Boulonnais.
   The preceding group represent sections of the Bas Boulonnais. The first three (2G), (27), (28), are nearly parallel to each other, and nearly perpendicular to the direction of the coast north and south of Boulogne. The first shows the unconformable position of the lower oolite on the mountain limestone about Marquise and Leulinghen, and of the cretaceous system in the north-eastern corner of the district. The second section shows the superposition of that system on the Oxford clay. The third (28) exhibits the structure of Montlambert, the highest hill within the chalk boundary. The rapid rise of the beds on its east side brings up the Oxford

clay in the valley at Bainctun. At the eastern end of the section, the cretaceous system is again observed to rest immediately on that clay, as does the lower part of it also in the Foret de Desvres. These sections are on a scale about twice as great in length as those of the Wealden district; section (29) is on a scale about eight times as great. It is a section of the coast north from Boulogne. The line of La Creche is finely exhibited in the cliff. The section also shows the fault at Wimereux; the beds continued from La Creche to a beneath the surface of the sea, would on the north side of the fault be found at a', if they still existed there, as they do within less than a mile of the beach. From the fault the beds are observed to descend towards the north into the next valley; from which they rise again on the north of Auxdresselles, forming the third line represented on the map, in proceeding northward from Boulogne. Section 30 shows the fault by which the valley of the Denacq is formed, and section 31 represents that of Montlambert in a direction perpendicular to that given in (28) ; it also shows the continuation of the line of La Creche near the St. Omer road, where it assumes the character of a fault. The valley of the Denacq on meeting this fault assumes its direction.
  In these sections, the beds between the gault and Kimmeridge clay are not distinguished from each other. The upper portion of these beds is undoubtedly the lower greensand of our own country. The lower portion is considered to belong to the Portland formation. The former portion consists almost entirely of ferruginous sand ; the latter contains huge calcareous blocks, sometimes forming irregular beds, which are worked, in many places, for building and other purposes. There are large quarries of this kind on Montlambert, where the beds are immediately above the Kimmeridge clay ; and also near the column of Napoleon, immediately on the north side of the fault of La Creche, by which, on the south side, the lower beds of the Kimmeridge clay are brought up to the level of the quarries.

Description of the Map.
  The map contains the Bas Boulonnais on the east, and the disturbed district, mentioned in the memoir, as far west as Southampton. The greater part of the great Wiltshire plateau of chalk lies still further to the west, and is too extensive to be included.
  The boundary of the disturbed district, denoted by a black dotted line, comprises that extent of country (as far as the map extends) which I conceive to have been simultaneously disturbed. The interior dotted black line indicates that part of the district in which the elevatory force is conceived to have acted generally with greater intensity than in the remaining portion. It comprises the whole district of the Weald (as defined by the great Wealden denudation) and that of the Bas Boulonnais. These boundaries are, of course, to be considered as only approximate, and independent of local irregularities.
  The red lines are lines of elevation, whether they be faults, anticlinal lines, or lines of curvature. The continuous red lines denote lines of elevation clearly established by observation; the -dotted lines denote those the existence of which rests on less positive evidence. Synclinal lines are not marked.
  The map has been engraved on a reduced scale from that of the Ordnance Survey.


