The district about to be described lies on the Rhine, from the mouth of the Sieg, below Bonn, to the town of Linz, a distance of about eighteen English miles, and extends nearly five miles inland, on both sides of the river.
A short way above Bonn the Rhine leaves the mountainous land, through which it has flowed with little interruption from its source, and enters a vast plain that extends to the North Sea, the nearest shore of which is about a hundred and thirty miles distant.
The Siebengebirge, or Seven Mountains, are the grand feature in the district, and constitute a group of hills, of very graceful forms, on the right bank of the river. Looking down from one of their higher summits, one sees a numerous assemblage of conical hills and connecting ridges; but when viewed from a distance, and in certain positions, seven peaks rise conspicuously above the rest, and hence the group has received its name. Of these, the most remarkable, as well from its individual form as from its fame in legendary story, is the Drachenfels, with a ruined castle on its summit. But the Oehlberg is the highest point, being 1369 English feet above the level of the sea, or 1209 above the Rhine, the surface of which at Konigswinter, a small town at the foot of the Drachenfels, is, at its mean height, 160 feet above the seaf. (A table of the principal heights will be found in the Appendix.)
The Siebengebirge and adjacent country have been described with more or less detail by several eminent geologists of Germany. The earliest memoir on the volcanos of this district is probably that of BARTHOLOMEus Hempelmann und Joh. Wilh. Muenster, Ueberbleibsel erloschener Vulkane in einigen Gegenden des NiederrheinsBonn, 1785. There is a very copious work by Nose, which was published in 1789, and, considering the time when it was written, it possesses great merit, and evinces minuteness of observation. Professor Nbggerathf of Bonn has described some of the more remarkable features of the district, and Messrs. Von Oeynhausen and Von Dechen have given, in a periodical Journal, a general view of what Nose, Noggerath, Steininger, and others had written, adding many original observations. But to the geologists of England this remarkable district is little known; it is, however, particularly deserving of their attention, for, diversified as is the mineral structure of the British isles, nothing analogous to it occurs in them; and it affords this further attraction, that the Siebengebirge and the neighbouring country of the Eifel are the nearest points to England where volcanic phenomena, at all approaching in character to those of modern times, can be seen. Those who are desirous of studying, on the spot, the effects of volcanic action, by availing themselves of the facilities of steam navigation, may, with great ease, in six days from leaving London, reach the Mosenberg in the Upper Eifel, and there stand by the side of a stream of lava, and, although the fires have been long extinguished, on the edge of a crater covered with cinders. Nor is it to be forgotten, that these numerous objects of geological interest present themselves in a country renowned for the charms of its natural scenery and historical associations.
I have deposited in the museum of the Society a suite of 277 specimens in illustration of this paper, with a descriptive catalogue. The accompanying Map has been coloured in part from my own observations; but as far as the Siebengebirge are concerned, it is, with a few alterations which I have seen occasion to introduce, a copy of one communicated to me by Professor Noggerath, and which he kindly permitted me to make use of. In a country so covered with a luxuriant vegetation as this is, one cannot say that the boundary lines of the different formations are exacts, or that all the phaenomena which bear upon the geological history of the country have been discovered; future observers will probably see reason to make alterations in these boundaries, and I have no doubt that much remains to reward further researches.
From my learned friends Professors Goldfuss and Noggerath I derived much assistance in the course of my inquiry, not only in conversation, but also by the liberality with which they laid open to me the valuable collections in the museum of the University under their charge. I am further much indebted to the kindness of the Count von Beust, President of the Council of Mines in the Prussian Rhenish Provinces, who made the extensive geological library and the documents belonging to that establishment freely accessible to me.
General Structure.
The lowest and the prevailing sedimentary deposit of the district is grau- wacke, both in the form of sandstone and of slate, a continuation of the same formation which covers so great an extent of country in the Lower Rhine and in the Eifel; but here no limestone beds are associated with it. None of the later secondary strata occur, and the grauwacke is covered unconformably by a deposit of the tertiary period, consisting of a series of beds of sand, sandstones, clays, and lignites, which collectively constitute a brown-coal formation. This is covered by an extensive bed of gravel, and above the gravel is a loosely coherent sandy loam, containing terrestrial and aquatic shells of existing species, called in the Rhine valley by the technical name of Loess. From under the grauwacke a variety of unstratified rocks have been erupted, consisting of various kinds of trachyte and trachyte tuff, basalt, dolerite, and other modifications of trap; and in one place volcanic scorias. The main body of the Siebengebirge is composed of these unstratified rocks.
The structure of the Siebengebirge was long considered to be different in its character from that of any other group in Germany; and it is so with the exception of two analogous formations, the one in Nassau, near Montabaur, lately described by Stifft; the other not far from Griitz in Styria, of which an account was published by M. von Buchf in 1820 ; and by Dr. Daubeny in 1826J. It is remarkable that the trachyte of Nassau had not been previously examined by geologists : it is accompanied, as in the Siebengebirge, by trachyte tuff and phonolite, and rises in the midst of a basaltic district of vast extent, connected with that of the Westerwald. Professor Mitscherlich visited that part of Nassau in 1832, and I saw him just after he had been there. He described the trachyte as covering a space quite as great in extent as the Siebengebirge, but not forming such elevated hills, the trachyte outbursts rarely exceeding a very moderate elevation above the surface. In texture they very much resemble those of the Siebengebirge, and, like them, present various modifications of the constituent parts. 
I shall first describe the several formations in detail, in the following order: Grauwacke, Trachyte, Trachyte Tutf, Basalt, Brown-Coal Formation, Loess; and shall then point out their several relations to each other, drawing such conclusions as to their several ages, and the geological history of the district, as the facts appear to me to warrant.
Grautvacke.
This rock varies considerably in mineral character, sometimes occurring as a fine-grained clay slate, not distinguishable from that of Westmoreland; in others, as a coarse red sandstone, very like some beds of the old red sandstone of Herefordshire and Shropshire. Although I found no opportunities of forming a decided opinion on the subject, it is probable that the prevailing rock in the neighbourhood of the Siebengebirge belongs to the later periods of the grauwacke deposit. At Dottendorf, on the left bank of the Rhine, about two miles from Bonn, there are beds of it of a loose texture containing rounded pebbles of slate, with numerous vegetable impressions, which, in specimens, might be taken for a sandstone of the coal-measures. These impressions are too indistinct in form to enable one to pronounce upon their nature ; they are black, and when exposed to heat the blackness disappears. Impressions of Terebratulae and the stalks of Encrinites, although abundant in the grauwacke of the adjoining country, are not very common within this district. They are found in that near Rhondorf, and in the neighbourhood of Unkel. In some places it contains anthracite; and I was informed by Mr. A. L. Sack that at Bruckhausen six different beds of it were found, one of which was a foot thick, but they were not continuous.
The strata are generally highly inclined, but they are found at all angles. There is neither uniformity in the strike nor in the dip, but the former is most generally from north-east to south-west, and the dip more frequently south than north. In the immediate neighbourhood of the Siebengebirge the strata are thrown up in all directions, which, at first sight, might be thought to be caused by the eruption of the volcanic matter; but there are great derangements of the grauwacke in the Eifel and Westervvald, at a distance from igneous rocks. Sudden variations in the strike and dip, the latter from vertical to horizontal, (if I may so speak of dip,) may be well observed between Unkel quarry and Remagen, and on the opposite side of the Rhine between Erpel and Orsberg.
The extent occupied by the grauwacke will be seen by an inspection of the accompanying Map. It flanks the volcanic region of the Siebengebirge on the east and south, and appears in detached spots on its western side, but it is wholly wanting on the north. On the left bank of the river it constitutes the ridge from Remagen to Rolandswerth, but it is partially covered by the brown-coal formation and by loess between these places ; and from Rolandseck northward, it is covered by the brown-coal formation, except in a few places on the eastern side of the elevated plateau that runs from Rolandseck in a north-west direction; as at Muffendorf, Friesdorf, Dottendorf, and Kessenich, in all which places it appears in highly inclined strata.
Trachyte.
There are several varieties of this rock. Glassy felspar is the chief ingredient in all, mixed with hornblende, occasionally augite, quartz, magnetic iron, and sometimes, but rarely, mica. Distinct crystals of glassy felspar, often of great size, are imbedded in the base of most of the varieties. The different aspects which the rock presents depend mainly on the felspar of the base being largely crystalline or small granular, upon the proportion of hornblende and size of its crystals, upon the size and proportion of the separate imbedded crystals of felspar and hornblende, and upon the colours imparted by the different slates of the iron which enters into the composition of all. Some varieties are also produced by the felspar being decomposed.
The places where tbe trachyte can be studied to most advantage are on the Drachenfels, the Wol- kenburg, and the Stenzelberg, especially the two latter, where there are extensive quarries. The trachyte of the Drachenfels is one of the most remarkable varieties : it is a gray stone, with a crystalline base of felspar, and minute crystals of hornblende, including separate crystals of felspar, often more than two inches long and an inch and a half in diameter. It has been for ages used as a building-stone, and is upon the w hole very durable, except that the separate crystals of felspar are apt to fall out. The Cathedral of Cologne is built of it. The trachyte of the Stenzelberg contains more hornblende, and has few imbedded crystals of felspar; but those of hornblende often occur, and are sometimes of a great size. In some places there are portions of the rock, separated by sharp lines from the rest of the mass, of a dark fine-grained texture, so as to look like included fragments of basalt; but it is probable that they are fragments of slate, altered by the heat of the melted trachyte, as there are other similar portions about whose origin there can be no doubt, the slaty structure being quite distinct. In the quarry of the Stenzelberg a face of rock about sixty feet in height is exposed: it is divided by vertical rents into large tabular masses of irregular forms, and in some places they are rounded, standing out like the stems of gigantic trees, the rock separating into curved layers parallel to the axis, a tendency to exfoliation which is often observable in small specimens. This appearance has been particularly described by Professor Noggerath*, and Professor Goldfuss, in his Geognostiche Tafeln, has given a print representing the face of the quarry at that time : it is now a good deal altered, and the appearance of exfoliation on the great scale is at present not so marked as it is in the print. The trachyte in the upper part of the quarry is vesicular, and it resembles the lava stream which is quarried for millstones at Nieder Mendig near the Laacher See; so much so, as to suggest the idea that the latter owes its origin to a melted trachyte. Mr. Lyell, who visited this place with me, remarked the great resemblance of the trachyte to the rock quarried above the Plateau de l’Aigle, not far from the baths of the Mont Dor in Auvergne. The trachyte of the Wolkenburg resembles that of the Stenzelberg, including, although more rarely, large separate crystals of hornblende, and occasionally large masses of quartz. It often contains calcareous spar, lining cavities, and in well-defined crystals. Here, also, a lofty face of rock is exposed in the quarry, exhibiting the trachyte in large vertical tabular masses, without apparent cross joints, although these exist, as the rock separates easily into huge blocks by natural fissures. It is for the most part of a light fawn colour ; but when the large masses are broken they show a bluish gray nucleus, such as is often seen in trap rocks. The one colour, however, does not always graduate into the other; on the contrary, there is sometimes a sharp line between them, and at the separation the trachyte is of a vitreous texture. I observed the same thing in the trachyte of the Keilsbrunnen quarry, with a tendency to globular decomposition. One of the most remarkable varieties of trachyte is that of the Perlen Hardt, on the eastern side of the group. I nowhere found such large imbedded crystals as here, but they are extremely brittle, and consequently good specimens are not easily obtained. The base is much decomposed, the felspar being in some places changed into a bright red earth : it contains small yellow crystals of sphene. At the Rosenau there is a variety containing augite; I obtained a specimen at this place with a separate well-defined crystal of that mineral; and close to this spot I found a sudden change into a variety with large imbedded crystals of felspar, like that of the Draehenfels, a circumstance which, like many others, shows under how many different forms the same materials may issue from a volcanic focus. At the Klein Rosenau there occurs a variety of a light gray colour, very compact, with a conchoidal fracture and ringing sound, a phonolite, composed of felspar and quartz, without any hornblende or other ingredient; and it passes into another kind of a light fawn colour, still more compact, in which the quartz predominates almost to the exclusion of the felspar, being infusible, while the gray variety is readily acted upon by the blowpipe: the latter is in some places of a bright pale green, apparently from an admixture of iron, and contains chalcedony, hyalite, and veins of ferruginous opal.
The Hummerieh, the Mittelberg, and the Bruder-Kunzberg are three conical hills, which rise out of an elevated plateau of grauwacke at some distance to the south of the main group of the Siebengebirge. They are composed of trachyte, but of a kind bearing a strong resemblance to some varieties of trap, particularly that of the Mittelberg and Bruder-Kunzberg. It is of a gray colour, has a much smaller proportion of distinct crystals of felspar and hornblende, and has somewhat of a foliaceous structure. At the Hummerieh it is rudely columnar, and has a tendency to globular decomposition : at the foot of the same hill it has the character of an amygdaloid.
The affinity between trachyte and the trap family has been pointed out by many geologists ; long ago by M. von Buch in his admirable essay on Trap Porphyry. In the Siebengebirge it would be easy to form a suite of specimens, showing a gradation from a white trachyte to a compact black basalt. The analogy is further seen by the columnar form and tendency to globular decomposition. Near the Thier Garten, north of the Stenzelberg, there is a variety of trachyte scarcely distinguishable from the base of an earthy amygdaloid ; and I found a block at the foot of the Drachenfels, of a green colour, very like some kinds of serpentine. Nor is this intimate connexion between these two classes of unstratified rocks different from what might naturally have been expected to happen, for the materials of both exist in the same spot; variations in the proportions of these not very numerous ingredients, in the degrees of heat to which they were exposed, in the circumstances under which they cooled, would perhaps account for all the shades of difference we meet with. M. Yon Buch states in the memoir above quoted, that when trachyte passes into a black substance, the felspar and hornblende have disappeared, and olivine and augite have taken their places. Much light has been thrown on this subject by the interesting experiments of Mr. G. Rose, who has shown how intimately hornblende and augite are connected : he obtained artificial crystals of the forms of augite by fusing- hornblende ; and he conceives that hornblende may be formed by slow, and augite by rapid cooling. Such gradations show how necessary it is to be cautious in drawing geological inferences from mere mineralogical variations, and that in giving new names to rocks merely on account of such differences, much confusion and error may be introduced. Notwithstanding, however, this connexion between the trachyte and basalt of this district, the basalt appears to have been, if not entirely, at least in great part, erupted at a distinct and later period, and I have not discovered any evidence of trachyte having been again ejected after the basalt had begun to flow.
There is only one place where I have seen the trachyte in the form of a dike or vein, and I have not been able to learn that it is so met with in any other spot. This dike crosses the road from the Lowenbiirg Tranke to the Perlen Hardt. It is about five feet wide, and is much decomposed, but the fresher parts resemble the trachyte of the Perlen Hardt. It traverses a trachyte tuff, containing hard masses of trachyte and fragments of slate.
The substances which in Hungary and Central Prance accompany trachyte, viz. pitchstone, obsidian, pearlstone, and pumice, do not occur in the Siebenge- birge, if we except some portions of the latter that are met with occasionally in the trachyte tuff. It has in no instance flowed as a stream, nor do any of the hills in the Siebengebirge show any signs of a crater.
The ground is so covered with vegetation that it is very rarely that the different rocks can be seen in contact. In one place only have I been able to discover the trachyte and grauvvacke together : this is behind the village of Rhondorf, at the Bruckersberg, where trachyte rises under grauwacke strata, inclined at a high angle, bent and broken, and both are covered by a thick unstratified mass of loess. The trachyte is much decomposed, but at a short distance it is tolerably fresh. 
When the water in the Rhine is low, trachyte rocks may be seen stretching from the foot of the Drachenfels a considerable way across the river; but it has not been found in any part of this district on the left bank of the Rhine, except at Borkum, about three miles west by south of Mehlem : there it is of a grayish white colour, is composed of white felspar and minute portions of green hornblende, with imbedded crystals of glassy felspar. It forms a small hill, surrounded on all sides by grauwacke slate, but the junction cannot be seen.
Trachyte Tuff.
A considerable part of the Siebengebirge is covered with a tufff consisting of angular fragments of trachyte, generally in an earthy state, especially as regards the felspar, for the most part loosely aggregated, but sometimes so compact as to be quarried for various economical purposes. The fragments are usually small, seldom larger than hazel-nuts or small beans, and sometimes so fine, that when the stone is white and compact, it is very like a coarse chalk. It occurs grayish white, yellow, and brown of various tints, and sometimes of a reddish colour. It frequently contains masses or balls of hard trachyte, varying in diameter from a few inches to two feet and upwards, and fragments of slate, usually angular, but sometimes rounded. Except in one situation, which I shall afterwards mention, I never found any basalt fragments in the tuff, an important fact as regards the history of these volcanic regions. They were formerly stated to have occurred, but later observations have shown that what was taken for basalt is a very compact black slate. I searched for basalt in those places where it was said to occur, but never found any.
The trachyte tuff generally occupies the intervening valleys, and is found at considerable elevations, but none of the higher summits are composed of it: they are either of trachyte or basalt. Its extent and mode of surrounding the trachytic and basaltic hills will be best understood by an inspection of the Map, but I shall mention some of the spots where it may be most distinctly seen.
The road from Konigswinter into the Wintermuhlenthal goes across the extremity of a ridge, which descends from the Drachenfels, apparently wholly composed of trachyte tuff, and at a place called the Holle it is cut through to the depth of forty feet. Here it is of a brown colour, and seems to contain much iron. It is traversed in all directions by lines like the decomposing crusts of two surfaces united, which sometimes give a false notion of stratification: in many places it is decomposed in concentric layers, like basalt, and it contains numerous masses of trachyte and slate. It is traversed by basalt dikes, which will be afterwards described. A tuff similar to this occurs between the Lohrberg and Scheerkopf, where it is traversed by the trachyte dike, mentioned p. 439, and it is here at an elevation of about 900 feet. The tuff in these two places is different from any that occurs elsewhere in the district. After passing the Holle, and arriving at Quegstein, at the entrance of the vailey, a white, very loosely coherent tuff, including fragments of slate, rests on a compact sandstone of the brown-coal formation, and is covered by loess : specimens may be obtained of the junction of the tuff and sandstone. In the museum of the University of Bonn there are specimens of tuff from this place with impressions of the leaves of trees similar to those which are found in the brown-coal formation. In the immediate vicinity of this spot there was a knoll of basalt, which contained fragments of slate converted into jasper, of which several specimens may be seen in the museum ; but the hard rock has been entirely removed for mending the roads. Higher up the valley, the tuff, preserving its white colour, becomes more compact, and at the Ofenkulenberg, a ridge descending from the Wolkenburg, it is quarried. It is much used for building ovens, from its property of resisting heat, and is thence called Baclcofenstein, and from being easily worked, masses are hollowed out to form troughs. In the road leading to the quarry it is traversed by a dike of basalt; and Mr. Noggcrath says, that at this place impressions of leaves have been found in the tuff. In the Keilsbrunnen Steig, near the Ofenkulenberg, a similar tuff is traversed by dikes of basalt.

The trachyte tuff is well seen in the Haisterbacherthal, the other great valley which runs up into the Siebengebirge from Ober-Dollendorf, to the Stenzelbcrg and to Haisterbacherroth. At the Langenberg it is loosely coherent, white, and pale red, contains much pumice, fragments of slate ; and portions of wood, in a soft state and of a brown colour, are not uncommon. Small crystals of glassy felspar may be picked out of the earthy base, and the ruts in the road are often coated with magnetic iron-sand, left by the rain that has washed the tuff. It contains numerous masses of trachyte, many of which are quite fresh, and resemble those of the Dracbenfels, Rosenau and Stenzelberg ; others unlike any found in situ. The tuff in this place lies in beds which are nearly horizontal, but it exhibits that partial and irregular deviation from horizontality in short distances, so often seen in sections of beds of gravel where there are alternations of sand, indicating the deposition of the tuff to have taken place under the surface of water. Ascending the valley at the foot of the Wirlberg to the Stenzelberg Kreuz, another section of the tuff is seen covered by loess; and Professor Noggerath states that the tuff here was traversed by a vein of opal jasper from two to three inches thick, and nearly vertical, very like the wood opal of Hungary : it has long since been carried all away. Immediately above Ober Cassel a tuff is found which differs considerably from any other in the district I have met with, in as much as it contains fragments of basalt and scoriae, together with balls of clay ironstone. From its situation it is not improbable that this may be an after deposit of trachyte tuff, along with clay of the brown-coal formation.
Behind the village of Honnef a small knoll, called the Schwarzenerdenkopf, is formed of a conglomerate or rather breccia, to which I have found nothing like in any other part of the district. It contains fragments of trachyte of different kinds, scoriaceous basalt, compact basalt, quartz, crystals of felspar and hornblende. It is surrounded on all sides by grauwaeke, and is of very limited extent. It is altogether a very singular occurrence, and not very intelligible as to its origin.
Between the villages of Dambruch and Rott, on the northern slope of the Siebengebirge, considerably within the region of the brown-coal formation, and four miles from the nearest point where trachyte occurs, there are distinct beds of trachyte tuff lying between beds of clay and clay ironstone. The same association of tuff with the brown-coal formation is found at Scheurn, Ut- weiler, and Oehlinghoven. It is generally composed of smaller fragments than the tuff nearer to the trachyte, but it contains masses of fresh hard trachyte. At Scheurn it contains impressions of the leaves of trees, similar to those found in the brown-coal formation.
The only spot on the left bank of the Rhine where I have found trachyte tuff is in a lane behind the village of Muffendorf, between that place and Godesberg; it is very similar to that near the Drachenfels, and contains large masses of trachyte.
It has been remarked by some who have described the Siebengebirge, that the trachyte tuff always corresponds in composition with the trachyte nearest to it, as if it were derived from a disintegrated trachyte, and were thus a recomposed rock. I have looked for this correspondence of structure, but could never satisfy myself that such is the fact. In the first place the tuff' is, in almost every case, in too earthy a state to enable one to say of what particular species of trachyte it is composed; and in the next place, it occurs generally surrounded by trachytes of various kinds; and lastly, the masses or balls of trachyte which it contains are very often entirely different from any variety that now exists en masse. In addition to all these objections to its being derived from preexisting trachyte. I think there is every reason to suppose that the ejection of the tuff preceded that of the solid trachyte, just as in existing volcanos showers of ashes often precede streams of lava.
Basalt.
Although all the rocks I am about to describe under this head do not strictly correspond in mineralogical character with the black compact substance to which the term is usually applied, I shall not convey any erroneous idea by employing it, as by far the greater proportion of the trap rocks of the district are true basalt, characterized by the presence of olivine, and the rest have a great resemblance to it.
Basalt occurs in different parts of the district on both sides of the Rhine. In the Siebengebirge it forms entire hills, and dikes of it traverse grauwacke, trachyte, and trachyte tuff; it is also associated with the beds of the brown coal formation. The three highest hills in the district are composed of it, viz. the Diisberg near Linz, the Oehlberg, and the Lowenburg in the Siebengebirge; and, by a reference to the Table of Heights in the Appendix, it will be seen that it constitutes one half of the separate hills in the group. The extent of their united surfaces is also fully equal to that occupied by trachyte.
There are two important differences as regards the manner in which the two classes of rocks have been ejected: the trachyte, except in a single instance, is not found in veins traversing other rocks, and the basalt is never associated with basaltic tuff except at Siegburg, to be afterwards described, and that hill is not within the Siebengebirge group.
The summit of the Lowenburg is composed of a rock that would be called dolerite by most geologists, its constituent parts, augite and felspar, being in much larger grains than in basalt: it contains magnetic pyrites, and it separates in some places into slender irregular columns.
The upper part of the Oehlberg is a close-grained black basalt in large tabular or rudely columnar masses, highly magnetic, and possessing polarity; it contains in some places numerous reddish brown grains, which are probably hyacinth, as that mineral is not unfrequently met with in the basalt of the district: among the specimens which accompany this paper is one from Papelsberg near Ober-Cassel, with a well-defined crystal of hyacinth. The ridge between Ober-Cassel and Ramersdorf is wholly composed of basalt, containing much common calcareous spar and arrago- nite, but no zeolite, a substance which seems to be of very rare occurrence in the Siebengebirge. Numerous quarries have been opened in this ridge ; in the most considerable of them the rock has the remarkable appearance of a gigantic globular concretion, an ellipsoid, the shorter axis of which is at least seventy feet, composed of concentric layers. Professor Noggeratb has described this spot; and although by the operations of quarrying the appearances are a good deal altered since his drawing was made, the concentric arrangement of the rock is quite distinct. In a quarry north of this the basalt is split into tabular masses like stratification ; and these again into smaller portions by cross rents, so that the face of the rock looks like a dry-built wall of squared stones, an appearance not at all uncommon in modern lavas. In a quarry under Fovaux’s Hauschen, a little further north, the basalt presents the appearance of a pile of globular concretions so squeezed together as to assume the form of flattened lenticular masses.
In the southern part of the district the sharp cone which rises from the grauwacke plateau above Honnef, called the Leyberg, is composed of rudely columnar basalt; and between it and Linz are four other conspicuous hills, rising in a like manner from the grauwacke; the Gross Diisberg, 1325 feet above the Rhine, the Klein Diisberg, the Hummelskopf, and the Mendenberg, all composed of basalt. On approaching the Mendenberg from Erpel or Linz, one is surprised to see the quantity of fragments of the most regular slender basaltic columns, which are applied to all sorts of purposes, as building-stones; pig-styes are constructed of pillars which would be prized as beautiful specimens in a public museum. The quarry from which these are procured is situated immediately under the summit of the Mendenberg; it forms at present an oval space of about fifty feet by thirty, the entrance to which is by a narrow passage, and it is surrounded by walls twenty feet high, of the most regular slender columns, standing nearly erect, and packed close together like the cells of a honeycomb, but easily separable and without cross joints, so that single columns are sometimes obtained of the whole height: I saw one lying on the ground, a hexagon of nine inches diameter and sixteen feet long. The most regular columns are pentagons and hexagons ; in these the angles are very sharp. It is a very compact black basalt, which breaks into very sharp fragments that ring like glass, and contains few imbedded minerals: I obtained, however, a good specimen of slender prismatic mesotype. The ends of the columns reach the surface, and are not covered by amorphous basalt; but they are an inferior bed, for higher up, at the very summit, there is a mass of columns less regular in form, lying in an inclined position, and detached from each other. Such is the profusion of basaltic columns in this neighbourhood, that the walls of the town of Linz are wholly built of them, laid on their sides, with the ends projecting outwards; and the streets are paved with the smaller columns set on end, a miniature representation of the Giant’s Causew'ay. The walls of Bonn and Cologne are in the same way built of fragments of basaltic columns laid with brick; and the posts by the sides of the roads and streets in this part of the country are generally made of the same ready-shaped stones.
All round Linz basalt breaks out from the grauwacke at detached points. One of the most considerable of these eruptions is the Erpeler Lei, which rises to a very considerable height from the edge of the river. These basalt knolls are of very frequent occurrence towards the east and southeast of this district, and they form a continuation of the eruptions around Siegen, in the Wester- wald and near Frankfurt; and these are connected with the greater masses of the Vogelgebirge Rhongebirge, and Habichtwald. It breaks out, too, at several detached points on the left bank of the Rhine within this district. The Landskron in the lower part of the Ahr valley, a hill about 800 feet high, is composed of grauwacke for two thirds of its height; but the upper part is basalt, showing some tolerably regular jointed columns. Opposite to the town of Unkel a considerable face of rock is exposed in an extensive quarry: here the whole mass of basalt is columnar, the columns lying in an inclined position, and separated from each other as if there had been an intermediate part reduced to an earthy state by decomposition. The basalt itself is very fresh, and contains many simple minerals, especially olivine in rounded granular masses, sometimes as large as a turkey’s egg, calcareous spar, hornblende, mesotype, hyacinth, and magnetic iron. In the upper part of the quarry there is a basalt conglomerate which includes fragments of wood, and above that a pretty thick bed of loess. When the water in the Rhine is low the columnar basalt is seen extending a considerable way into the stream, and before a great part of it was removed it rendered the navigation here difficult and dangerous. Eruptions of columnar basalt may also be seen at Rolandseck, at Dechelsberg near Nieder Bachem, at Liihnsberg near Muffendorf, and near Kessenich ; and the conical hill of Godesberg, which, crowned with its ruined castle, forms so conspicuous a feature in the landscapes of this neighbourhood, is composed of the same rock.
Basalt Dikes.
These are of frequent occurrence in the Siebengebirge.
In the Keilsbrunnen quarry, not far from the Lowenburg, a dike of amygdaloidal trap, about twelve feet thick, traverses trachyte; and one traversing the trachyte tuff in the immediate neighbourhood, from its composition and direction, seems to be a prolongation of the same. Not far from hence, at the Lowenburg Tranke, the trachyte is traversed by a dike of amygdaloidal trap about two feet wide, the trachyte being much decomposed. In the lane leading from Konigswinter to the Keilsbrunnen quarry, between the Hirschberg and Wolkenburg, the trachyte tuff is traversed by four dikes in a space of about seventy-five feet. They are narrow, but their dimensions and their relations to the substance they cut through cannot be well seen from the covering of soil. Near the Stenzelberg Kreuz the trachyte tuff is cut by a dike which probably is connected with the basaltic hill, the Wirlberg, close by, and which probably has also sent out the dike in the opposite direction, which is seen near the Thier Garten. In a road leading over the hills due east of Hon- nef, near Steinsbusch, a dike of basalt cuts the grauwacke strata; there is no change produced in the latter either in regard to disturbance of the regularity of the stratification or the texture of the stone; but at no great distance, at the Goldnen Kistchen, a mass of basalt in contact with the grauwacke changes it into a hard substance like jasper, which splits into prismatic fragments.
In the Konigswinter valley, and in the road to the Ofenkulenberg quarry, and not far from it, a white trachyte tuff is traversed by a trap dike about six feet wide; the tuff is considerably hardened at and near the junction, and splits into prismatic fragments. The dike is a dark amygdaloidal basalt with olivine; but there seems to have been an intermixture with the tuff towards the sides, where it is so changed as scarcely to be recognisable from basalt in detached specimens. Where it is of a dark colour it separates into thin plates like a coarse slate, parallel to the direction of the dike. The tuff in the Konigswinter Holle, described p. 441. is traversed by two dikes of about two feet in width, which intersect each other; the one being thrown considerably out of its direction by the other, but the point of intersection is concealed by the road. The substance of these dikes is so much decomposed that it would be impossible to recognise them for basalt except by their resemblance to what occurs in other instances, where the rock is partly fresh and partly decomposed; indeed one of the dikes is changed into a substance very like a dun-coloured friable sandstone. Besides these two dikes there are two others in the same situation, but they do not present anything requiring particular notice.
One of the most remarkable volcanic eruptions of this neighbourhood occurs at Siegburg, a small town in the northern part of the district. The small river Sieg winds through an extensive alluvial plain, and in the midst of this, entirely detached from the adjoining hills, three conical eminences rise up, one of them quite insulated, the other two connected together by a low ridge. At the foot of the insulated cone, which is 211 feet high, the town of Siegburg is situated, and on its summit there is a vast building, formerly a monastery, now a public Lunatic Asylum, which forms a very conspicuous object for many miles round. The principal mass of these three hills is a tuff of a yellowish brown colour, in some places compact, but more usually of a loose texture ; in point of structure very like trachyte tuff, but substituting the constituent parts of basalt for trachyte as the material; and it is used for similar purposes, viz. the construction of ovens and fireplaces. Its component parts are for the most part decomposed basalt, but sometimes the fragments are fresh ; many are in the state of scorias, and there are numerous fragments of grau- wacke slate. It is often penetrated by calcareous spar, seemingly introduced by subsequent infiltration ; and it contains numerous fragments of dicotyledonous wood, generally brown like lignite, sometimes fossilized by calcareous spar, at others highly charged with iron ; balls of clay ironstone are not unfrequent. Mr. Lyell, who visited this spot with me, remarked the great resemblance of this tuff to the volcanic tuff of the Phlegraean Fields and of Ischia. The two connected hills are called the Grimprich and Wolsberg, and are 189 and 230 feet high. From the former stands out a mass of basalt at the summit, a part of a dike from the sides of which the tuff has been washed away, portions of it being still left adhering; the main part of the dike is a compact black basalt, but towards the sides it becomes scoriform ; it may be traced to the bottom of the hill. On the south-east side the tuff lies in beds dipping from the hill, that is, with a slope nearly parallel to its present surface. The basalt contains nests of arragonite in well-defined crystals. In the Wolsberg there are large quarries where the tuff may be seen in all its varieties, being sometimes so hard as to require to be blasted. On the south side, and just above the Sieg, it is traversed by a double dike of basalt, each branch about a foot wide, the tuff between being very different from that on the outside, appearing like cinders that had run together, part being in a twisted form, as is often seen when a viscid ropy stream of lava has cooled; the basalt of the dikes is also scoriform. No place can show in a more distinct manner the similarity of an undoubted lava to basalt occurring in situations where none of the usual appearances of active volcanos exist; for the basalt of these two cones could not be distinguished in specimens from the Rowley Rag of Staffordshire., or the Castle Rock of Edinburgh.
The only remaining point of volcanic eruption which I have to notice is the Roderberg, a hill above the village of Mehlem, on the left bank of the Rhine. From a distance, and even near at hand, one would not suspect that the hill had anything volcanic in its nature ; it is not conical, but looks like a smooth rounded prolongation of the adjoining hills that belong to the brown-coal formation. But at the beginning of the ascent from Mehlem loose black cinders appear, and on arriving at the summit there is found a circular depression of about a hundred feet deep, and a quarter of a mile in diameter, once the crater of a volcano, but now occupied by corn-fields surrounding a farm-house. It is on the north and north-east side chiefly that the volcanic materials are seen, for in the ascent from Nieder Bachem there are few traces of them, till one comes to the edge of the crater, even although the road is cut several feet deep into the hill in some places. On the north and north-east the edge of the crater is composed of a spongy scoriaceous rock, with marks of fusion, identical with the productions of active volcanos. At the south-west side of the crater, however, grauwacke appears, but whether in situ or in detached blocks it is difficult to determine ; it is of that brighter red colour from oxidation of iron which is produced when a portion of grauwacke is exposed to a strong heat. Upon this lies a yellow gravel, the same as that which covers the brown-coal formation throughout the district, and containing no fragments of volcanic matter; and upon the gravel lies a black tufaceous semi-indurated substance, disposed in layers which slope outwards from the crater.
Brown-Coal Formation.
This formation consists of an assemblage of beds of siliceous sand, sandstone, quartzose conglomerate, clay of different qualities, clay ironstone in layers and detached masses in the clay, and of lignite of various qualities, in distinct beds and intermixed with the clay.
It occupies a great extent of country on both sides of the Rhine. On the right bank it covers the northern slope of the Siebengebirge, as it falls to the plain through which the Sieg flows, occupying an area of about seven miles from east to west, and five from north to south. It occurs again north of the Sieg, in detached spots along the sides of the hills forming the eastern boundary of the Rhine valley, as far as the immediate vicinity of Bensberg, nine miles east of Cologne. On the left bank of the river it forms a long broad ridge of low hills, or rather plateau, lying between the valleys of the Rhine and the Erft, from the town of Meckenheim, nine miles south-west of Bonn, to the south of the town of Bergheim, between Cologne and Juliers, a stretch of about thirty miles; and Professor Noggerath informs me that he has traced the lignite beds at intervals from Bergheim to Aix la Chapelle. The breadth of the plateau varies from three to five miles. Its greatest elevation is about 200 feet above the plain on the eastern side ; and from the foot of the plateau near Briihl to the Rhine, a distance of about five miles, there is a fall of fifty feet. These two districts, on the right and left banks of the Rhine, are the chief deposits; but the formation occurs at several places further south, on both sides of the river, and also within the volcanic regions of the Sieben- gebirge and Lower Eifel.
The Siliceous Deposits.
The lowest member of the formation seems to be the loose siliceous sand ; with this is associated, and generally covering it, a sandstone of various decrees of coherence, sometimes so friable as to be easily rubbed between the fingers, at others as compact as a granular quartz rock. At Tanzchen and Quegstein, in the valley above Konigswinter, all these varieties may be seen together. Here also are found thick beds of a quartzose conglomerate, the pebbles of which are for the most part small, but sometimes as large as a pigeon’s egg, and so associated with the fine-grained quartzose rock, that specimens may be obtained of both united, sometimes showing a gradual transition from the coarse to the fine, at others a sharp line of separation. In specimens no one could distinguish this sandstone conglomerate of freshwater formation from rocks of constant occurrence in the grauwacke and older secondary strata. The conglomerate is traversed by yellow and brown semi-opal, which occasionally assumes the mammillary structure of chalcedony, and in which traces of vegetable structure may be detected.
In the neighbourhood of Rott and Geistingen, on the right bank of the Rhine due east of Bonn, there are found, associated with a thin leafy bituminous lignite which has obtained the name of Papierkohle (Paper-coal), laminm of a flinty substance, seldom above an inch thick, and usually accompanied with thin friable siliceous plates, earthy, and bearing some resemblance to the Polierschiefer that is found in the brown-coal formation of the Ha- bichtwald. Between the plates of the Papierkohle siliceous concretions, of the form and size of beans, are sometimes found.
The Argillaceous Deposits.
These consist of beds of clay of various qualities and colours, according to which they are used for making bricks, tiles, and pottery; and some is sent into Holland for making tobacco-pipes. In many places the clay is much mixed with earthy lignite, is in many places very pyritous, and when that is the case, works have been established for the manufacture of alum, as at Friesdorf on the left bank, and Holtorf on the right bank of the Rhine, both near Bonn. The clay, intermixed with earthy lignite, which also contains pyrites, is piled up in lumps, forming heaps of many yards in length; and after being for some time exposed to air and moisture, decomposition takes place, evolving much heat; sulphate of iron and sulphuric acid are formed, which last unites with the alumine of the clay, and by repeated solutions and evaporations, and the addition of potash, crystallized alum is obtained in the usual way. This spontaneous heating, often extending to inflammation, sometimes takes place in the pits where the brown coal is worked. Between the layers of the alum slate crystals of gypsum are often found, and large detached crystals of gypsum occur in the clay, as in the London clay, in both cases most probably produced by the decomposition of pyrites.
Clay ironstone is of frequent occurrence in the clay, both in the form of layers and in detached lenticular and irregular masses. In the neighbourhood of Rott thirteen different layers were found, varying from an inch to a foot in thickness, and making together nine and a half feet of ironstone. Massive portions of crystalline spathose iron have been found at Scheurn near Rott. 
The Brown-Coal or Lignite.
This is found in various states.
A dark brown or black earthy substance, friable, sometimes pulverulent, generally occupying the upper part of the lignite beds, and rarely showing a stratified structure.
A concreted mass, in which fragments of wood and leaves are visible, with a mixture of earthy matter.
Wood in different stages of bituminization, of all shades of colour, from light brown to black, and the latter sometimes approaching to the nature of jet.
Papierkohle, highly bituminous, burning with a bright flame, leaving a white ash, separating readily into leaves as thin as writing-paper; a deposit of finely comminuted vegetable matter and earth.
The wood is generally in fragments of inconsiderable size; but sometimes large stems of trees are found, and if lying horizontal, as they usually are, very often flattened. Trees have been met with in an upright position with their roots attached, and the stem passing through different beds, into which the lignite deposit is separable. Professor Nbggerath mentions two instances at Friesdor; in the one the tree was seven feet in diameter, and from the beds it penetrated must have been about ten feet high; in the other the tree was eleven feet thick, but how high could not be ascertained. At Zisselsmaar, on the western side of the plateau, an upright mass of root and stem, of four feet in length, was found. I do not, however, mention these instances as any proof of the trees being in the situation in which they grew, for if they were floated, the heavy root might keep them in an erect position, and the rarity of the occurrence is a strong presumption against the idea.
The wood is sometimes so fresh, so little changed, as to have been used at Viernich for timbers in the mines|. Pyrites is of frequent occurrence in all the beds; and sometimes, as at Friesdorf and Holtor, wood, in which the texture is preserved, is highly charged with a granular carbonate of iron. A specimen which accompanies this paper is a portion of a tree which I found in a thick bed of lignite at Friesdor; it was about four feet long, and a foot and a half in diameter. The interior was converted into carbonate of iron to the almost total disappearance of the woody texture, but this last was still entire on the outside, where the iron was in the state of a yellow oxide.. I have mentioned, p. 446, that I found a portion of wood highly charged with oxide of iron in the basaltic tuff of Siegburg; and it is important to remark, with reference to the relative age of the brown-coal formation, and the volcanic eruption of Siegburg, that in addition to this fact I found a specimen of bituminized wood in the basaltic tuff identical in appearance with a specimen which I obtained from the brown-coal beds at Geistinger Busch.
M. Von Dechen mentions that at Lieblar a lignite is found with a thin powdery coating of amber. From the smell which this coal gives out when burnt, the workmen call it edeler Weihrauch, frankincense.
Organic Remains of the Brown-Coal Formation.
These consist of vegetables, fish, insects, and reptiles : no shells of any sort have ever been found, except in one particular spot, which I shall afterwards notice; and no remains of quadrupeds, except in two very doubtful cases.
Remains of Vegetables.
The brown-coal or lignite beds consist of wood and of leaves, and wood and impressions of leaves are also found in the siliceous and argillaceous beds of the formation. As the woods occur in broken masses to which leaves are never attached, no decision can be pronounced as to the general to which they belong more exact than that of resemblance. Faujas St. Fond, in a description of a visit he made to the brown-coal mines at Lieblar, published in 1802, says that he obtained specimens of fruits found in the brown coal which Jussieu and other eminent botanists pronounced to belong to the palm tribe. The impressions of leaves are most distinct in the Papierkohle, the sandstone and clay ironstone, and the leaves belonged, doubtless, to the stems which are associated with them.
In sinking a pit some years ago in the clay at Bruch near Ober Cassel, there was found a bed of fragments of silicified wood four feet thick. Professor Noggerath made a very close examination of an extensive suite of specimens of the wood from this place, in the possession of Professor Leonhard of Heidelberg, with Mr. C. Bernhard Cotta, the author of an excellent work on fossil woods f, and the result was, that without a single exception they were all dicotyledonous. There exist, however, in the museum of the University of Bonn, two specimens from this place of a doubtful character. They are from three to four inches long, and about an inch and a half thick, and are silicified. They were long imagined to be fir tops, but Professor Nees von Esenbeck, Sen., who at the request of Professor Noggerath examined them with great care, was of opinion that they are most probably portions of the root of a species of Fern J. Among the specimens I obtained from this place is one in which the silicified woody fibres separate like some kinds of glassy actinolite ; this variety is not uncommon ; some are found passing into the state of semi-opal. At Alter Roth, near Haisterbach, I found in a friable sandstone a portion of a branch of a tree, which is remarkable in this respect, that while the form of the branch with a knot in it is perfectly preserved, the substance of the wood has been replaced, not as in the other instances by silica in a state of minute division, but by a somewhat coarse quartzose sand.
It does not appear that the vegetable remains contained in the brown-coal formation of this district have as yet been described by any botanist of acknowledged authority. My friend Professor Lindley has been so kind as to examine the specimens I have sent in illustration of this paper, and the following communication from him contains the result of that examination.
The principal part of the impressions of leaves is in a state which renders it impossible to determine, with any certainty, the nature of the plants to which they have belonged. They consist generally of casts of portions of dicotyledonous foliage, of so common an appearance that no one could have determined them with precision, even if they had been newly gathered and possessed of all those characters of texture, surface, colour, and odour, by which a botanist would be obliged, in the case of such fragments, to form his opinion. 
Among them are, however, three species, the existence of which is sufficient to determine with certainty the relative age of the formation ; and, with great probability, the nature of the climate of the North of Germany at the time of their deposit.
Messrs. Murchison and Lyell found in the tertiary formation of Aix in Provence, remains of a Cinnamon, and of a kind of coniferous plant called Podocarpus, figures of which are given in the Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal for 1829, p. 298. Both of these occur in the present collection, and along with them distinct traces of the leaf of some kind of Palm, which was also met with in the deposit at Aix.
The Cinnamon I formerly thought identical with C. dulce, a species now inhabiting China, and there is nothing in the impressions from Bonn to render it necessary to modify that opinion. At the same time it must be confessed that this identification may be erroneous, and that better specimens may prove it to be even a species of Tetradenia or Camphora.
The Podocarpus was referred, with some doubt, to P. macrophylla; and if not actually that species, or P. coriaceus, a West Indian species, may at least be considered as certainly belonging to the genus.
Of the Palm very imperfect fragments only remain. They consist of strap-shaped impressions, truncated at each end, with some of the parallel veins slightly thicker than the others, at rather “ unequal intervals, and also with traces of parallel ribs; the lateral veins diverge from the ribs at an angle of about 40°, and are remarkably well preserved.
Imperfect as are these data, they seem at first sight to lead to the conclusion that the climate of Bonn was tropical at the time of this deposit, because the Cinnamon is characteristic of the Flora of the Indian Archipelago; Podocarpus is found in the West Indies and at Sincapore, while the Palm might reasonably be considered in its natural station in such situations.
But it may also be supposed, from the same evidence, that the climate of Bonn approximated to that of the northern provinces of China, and the valleys of Nipal; for Cinnamomum dulce, to which the cinnamon-like leaf may have belonged, is, as has already been stated, Chinese; while the genera Tetradenia and Camphora range as far to the north as the mountains of Nipal, and “ even Japan: and Cinnamomum itself finds its most northern limit only in the upper mountains of Nipal, near the river Cosa. Podocarpus macrophylla itself has certainly been found iffiNipal, and probably near Nagasaki; and although it is impracticable to determine positively from such materials as we have here preserved, to what species of palm the impressions belonged, yet “ there is nothing in them at variance with the leaves of the modem Chamaerops, one species of which, the Chamcerops Palmetto, now inhabits the South of Italy and Barbary, and another the “ valleys of Nipal.
It may, therefore, be safely concluded that the climate of Bonn, at the period of the brown coal deposit, ranged between that of the Indian Archipelago and Nipal.
Remains of Fishes.
Professor Broun in a paper on the fossil remains of fish, found in the papierkohle of this district, states that he examined some hundred specimens, and that, with the exception of one, of which the remains were very indistinct, all belonged to one species. They are usually from two to three inches long, rarely exceed three quarters of an inch in depth, and the head forms a fourth part of the entire length. Nothing of the substance of the fish remains, but there is occasionally a dark coaly matter marking the contour of the body: there is even no appearance of the fragments of scales, nor of fins, ribs, vertebrae, or bones of the head, but the forms of all arc impressed on the Papierkohle with remarkable exactness, and they are for the most part quite entire. He considers them to belong to the genus Cyprinus, but to be dissimilar from any known species, and he has named it Cyprinus papyraceus. These impressions have been examined since that time by M. Agassiz, and are mentioned in one of the memoirs he published, preparatory to his more extensive work on fossil fishes. He confirms the opinion of Professor Bronn, naming the species, however Leuciscus papyraceus, in conformity with a new division of the genus CyprinusJ. Professor Bronn describes also a small crab, and Professor Goldfuss, in a recent memoir§, says that besides this specimen of the remains of Crustacea, there are three remarkable animals belonging to the Branchiopoda, the largest of which is more than an inch in diameter.
Remains of Insects.
These and the remains of some reptiles have been described by Professor Goldfuss in the memoir above quoted. Insects have been found in the papierkohle of Stosschen at the foot of the Mendenberg, at Orsberg near Linz, and at Friesdorf near Bonn. Sometimes nothingr emains but the impression of the form of their bodies ; at other times the bodies form a thin, compressed, coaly scale, shining, and sometimes having a metallic lustre. They seem to belong to the genera Lucanus, Meloe, Dytiscus, Buprestis, Cantharis, Cerambyx, Parandra, Belostoma, Cercopis, Locusta, Anthrax, and Tabanus.
Remains of Reptiles.
Professor Goldfuss describes a species of Frog, Salamander, Triton, and Ophis. These were found at Orsberg in the papierkohle. In this case, as in that of the fishes, the organized matter has almost wholly disappeared : very perfect impressions, however, remain, not only of the skeleton, but a dark shade in the coal marks the entire form of the animal, as in those anatomical plates where the skeleton is contained in a shaded form of the entire body. After a very careful examination, which he minutely describes, Professor Goldfuss satisfied himself that these remains belong to an extinct species of frog, which he has called Rana Diluviana. The salamander, which is about two inches long, also exhibits a structure somewhat distinct from existing species, and he has named it S. Ogygia. So with regard to the impression of a triton, about two inches long, and which he has named T. Noachicus. The remaining reptile he describes as being of a singular nature, the specimen exhibiting the appearance of two portions of a coiled snake, one of which is the end of the tail: there are no traces of bones, but there are impressions of scales arranged in a diverging form downwards, on each side of a ridge : he calls it Ophis dubius.
Remains of Quadrupeds.
Professor Noggerath, in describing the eighteen different beds composing the brown-coal formation at Putzberg near Friesdorff, speaking of the ninth bed from the surface, says that there was once found in it a large tusk of a wild boar; and of the eleventh bed, that there was found in it the bone of the leg of an ox in a very complete state of preservation, together with some other fragments of bones. An occurrence so important in the history of this formation led me to call the attention of Professor Noggerath to these passages in his memoir ; when he informed me that in drawing it up several years ago he had inserted several things on the authority of others : that he has a distinct recollection of having seen the bones in the collection of a private individual in Bonn, which has since been dispersed, but that he did not see them himself in situ. Faujas St. Fond, in the memoir above quoted, says that a very old miner at Lieblar had told him that he had fifteen years before that time found a stag’s horn in the brown coal beds.
Such is the whole result of my inquiry as to the existence of the remains of quadrupeds in the brown-coal formation ; and unsupported as the facts are by any subsequent discoveries, very little reliance can be placed upon their accuracy.
The sandstone clay and lignite deposits above described constitute what may properly be termed the brown-coal formation of this district, but there is a small local deposit which I have yet to notice, and which, if it belongs to the same formation, is highly important as regards the question of age. In a valley behind Godesberg lies the old monastery of Marienforst, and going from thence to the village of Muffendorf, the path crosses the summit of the plateau; and here, about half way between the two places, there are strewed upon the surface of the ground small blocks of a white siliceous stone, containing casts of freshwater shells, with jointed stalks of a plant. Mr. Brassard, late keeper of the University Museum at Popplesdorf near Bonn, conceived that he had found the rock in situ at the same spotwhere the loose blocks occur, and I accompanied Professor Noggerath and him to ascertain whether he was right in his conjecture, by digging round the mass. Although the ground was cleared away for some distance, and there was an excavation made in the rock to the depth of two feet, it is possible that it may still be only a large block. The stone is of a dull white colour, sometimes smoke gray like flint, generally of an earthy, but often of a crystalline translucent texture : in some places it contains yellow, brown, semi-opal, not to be distinguished from that which I have described as occurring in the quartzose conglomerate at Tanzchen, and like it passing into the mammillary structure of chalcedony. It contains numerous casts of Planorbes, Lymnei, and Paludinae, and jointed stalks of a plant. I have examined above a hundred fragments, to try to discover Gyrogonites, but have found none. Mr. Lyell informs me that M. Deshayes, to whom he showed some of these specimens, found in them the three freshwater shells above named : he said that they do not look like modern tertiary shells, that the Planorbis appears, as far as can be determined by a cast, identical with P. rotundatus; that the Lymneus seems to be longiscatus, both occurring in the Paris basin. The plant is described by Professor Lindley to be fragments of dicotyledonous wood ; and, in one of the specimens, there is a fragment of some organic body, which may have been the fruit of the palm, of which the nucleus is left entire, and the fleshy integuments half broken away.
This Marienforst siliceous rock has not been noticed by any previous writer on this district, probably because it has not been long known, as nothing of the kind exists in any other part of the district. If it had been at one time an extensive deposit, subsequently broken up, one could hardly fail to find fragments of it in the vast mass of gravel which covers the plateau; but this is not the case. On the other hand, I know of no rock in the adjoining country from which these blocks could have been derived; and had they come from a distance, it is not probable that they would have been confined to so small a spot. Although I do not mean to adduce it as a proof of identity, I would point out the almost identical semi-opal found in this rock and in the quartz conglomerate at Tanzchen. Upon the whole I am inclined to consider this as a small local deposit belonging to the same period as the brown-coal formation, and very possibly produced by some hot spring in the volcanic region holding silica in solution.
The brown-coal formation is covered by a mass of gravel almost throughout its whole extent, there being very few places where it is wanting. It is of very variable thickness, sometimes being only a thin covering, at others as much as eighty feet deep; and M. Von Dechen, in the memoir already quoted, describes a mass of sand which he considers as belonging to the gravel in the neighbourhood of Ichendor, near Bergheim, of 125 feet in thickness. The gravel consists of rounded fragments of grauwacke and quartz, the latter greatly predominating, the pebbles generally small, about the size of a walnut; but very often large blocks, both of grauwacke, quartz, and basalt are imbedded in it. The pebbles are united by an argillaceous
sand containing much iron, so that the general colour of the gravel is yelIow; very like that round London. I have never found any other fragments than those above named in the places where I have examined the gravel, but Professor Noggerath informs me that he has found in it trachyte, transition limestone, and bunter sandstein. To trace the history of this vast accumulation of gravel would be an interesting inquiry; but it would require a very extensive series of observations, a minute acquaintance with the rocks of the Upper Rhine and the adjoining lands, and an accurate knowledge of the forms and levels of the country, before any satisfactory conclusions could be attained.
The gravel often lies immediately upon the lignite deposit, but frequently a bed of clay is interposed. The following section is constructed from the description given by Professor Noggerath of the beds at Putzberg.

In most places the lignite rests upon clay, and below that come the sandstone and loose sand, the latter being generally the lowest. At Roisdorf, near Bonn, the sandstone is covered by bituminous clay; and at Frechem, near Briihl, thick beds of clay and lignite lie upon loose sand. In many places the sandstone occupies the surface, so that the clay and lignite have either never been deposited upon it, or have been carried away by subsequent denudation. At Friesdorf the clay and lignite beds rest immediately upon the ends of highly inclined strata of grauwacke. I have already noticed, p.442. the alternation of trachyte tuft'with the beds of the brown-coal formation ; and at p. 441. I have described the occurrence at Quegstein of trachyte tuff* lying upon sandstone. I have also said, p. 443. that basalt occurs in connexion with the brown-coal formation: the place where this has been most distinctly seen is at Utweiler, on the north-eastern border of the district, about four miles from the centre of the trachytic and basaltic eruptions of the Siebengebirge, but situated in a valley between two knolls of basalt, the Rother Hardt, nearest to it, and the Hinzberg, not very far off. I visited this place in 1832 with Professors Noggerath and Mit- scherlich, to see the workings in a new shaft which had been sunk to obtain the coal. The former has lately published in Karsten’s Archivfur Bergbau, &c., an account of his observations, together with some subsequently made by M. Augustus von Strombeck, on this occurrence of basalt in the lower ground. M. von Strombeck drew up the following account of the different beds sunk through in the new shafts :
The upper part consists of globular masses in some degree decomposed ; then comes a dark gray compact basalt, containing olivine, augite, and magnetic iron ore, but not regularly columnar.
The lower part of the mass is formed of a compact bluish gray argillaceous stone, a decomposed basalt or tuff, similar to what usually accompanies volcanic masses	
Here begin the brown-coal beds properly so called ; an indurated clay of a black colour from a mixture of coal, which splits into prisms about three inches long, and from eight to ten lines in diameter, the interstices filled with crystallized dolomite; a structure probably occasioned by the heated mass of basalt covering it.
Dark-coloured clay, containing much coaly matter 'and pyrites, but neither slaty
nor columnar.
It is remarkable that this bed should show no indication of that columnar structure which is so marked in the beds which lie immediately above and below it. A similar fact has been observed in the Meisner.
Then come the lignite beds, consisting of Black pitch coal, separating into prisms of from an inch to an inch and a half in diameter, standing perpendicular to the face of the basalt bed, with the interstices lined with crystallized dolomite. This passes gradually into a small coal.
Then comes a trachyte tuff, with portions of hard trachyte, into which they had sunk to the depth of two feet. It is here the usual underlier of the brown-coal beds, but it is also found lying between them, so that it is very possible if the shaft were sunk deeper, that this tuff would be gone through, and other brown-coal beds be found below it.
M. Von Dechen states that in the district of Briihl the beds lie considerably above the Rhine valley, and this seems to be equally the case on the right bank. It is worked at several places on the right bank, but by far the most considerable mines are on the other side of the river, and in the district immediately around Briihl. The united thickness of the lignite beds in different situations in the plateau is very various, often too inconsiderable to be worth working. It has not been ascertained by actual trial whether they stretch quite across the plateau, the mines being situated on the east and west sides, but this is very probably the case. The following table will show the thickness of the brown-coal beds at different points on each side, lying east and west of each other. The thickness includes the clay beds that may be interposed between one layer of brown-coal and another.
The various mines of brown-coal in the district give occupation to about 1200 persons. The coal is consumed almost entirely by the poorer classes, as its strong peculiar odour, and sometimes sulphurous vapours, render its use disagreeable. Some of the harder kinds are used as they are taken from the pit; but these form a small proportion, and are, moreover, not so valuable for fuel: the greatest part is used after it has been artificially prepared. It is beat and trodden after being well mixed with water, and is formed in shapes like the crown of a small hat, which are laid out to dry like bricks, and these when dry are preserved for use by being piled up under cover. In this state they are called Kliitten, and are sold on the ground for about nine groschen per hundred ; and as each of the kliitten weigh about five pounds when dry, the price is equal to about four shillings per ton.
The beds of the brown-coal formation are generally either horizontal or deviate only a few degrees from it. In the immediate neighbourhood of Ut- weiler, however, under a bed of loess about fourteen feet thick, there is a series of about twenty distinct strata of clay, distinguished by various colours, and containing four layers of lignite, each about six inches thick, which have an inclination about 60° S. This elevation was probably occasioned by the eruption of basalt which is in the immediate neighbourhood. On the left bank of the Rhine, and near Briihl, near which no unstratified rocks appear, there have been also considerable disturbances subsequent to the deposition of the beds. At Hennersgrube, near the old monastery of Beuten, the lignite beds are suddenly cut off by a fault to the depth of forty-nine feet.
By referring to the Map, it will be seen that the brown-coal formation exists to a considerable extent within the volcanic region of the Siebengebirge, especially in the valley of Haisterbach. It is found in two small patches in Konigswinter valley, one at a place called Kuckstein, pretty high up in the ascent to the Drachenfels, where clay beds are found ; the other in the bottom of the valley at Quegstein and Tanzchen, as already mentioned. Here the sandstone members of the series only occur, the quartzose conglomerate occurring in great detached masses, seemingly piled together. These probably formed indurated portions in a deposit of sand, which has been since washed away, as has been often noticed in sandy beds of the plastic clay and other tertiary deposits.
In the southern parts of this district the brown-coal formation occupies much higher situations. The Papierkohle of Orsberg, near Erpel, which contains the impressions of reptiles and insects, is 372 feet above the Rhine ; and continuing the ascent towards Bruckhausen, there is a plateau of about a mile square, which seems to be entirely composed of the brown coal formation. At the very foot of the Mendenberg, at Ehl and at Stosschen, there is a very extensive deposit of lignite on the slope of the mountain, very high above the adjoining valleys, which has long been worked for the purpose of making alum, the clay and lignite being highly pyritous. The latter splits into thin plates, and contains numerous impressions of leaves, and occasionally those of insects, and is about sixteen feet thick. The beds occur close to the basalt; and the workmen told me that they rise towards it, but that the actual contact is not seen. It appears that formerly four different beds
of lignite were worked, separated from each other by clay and friable sandstone 3. The Mender berg is 1198 feet above the Rhine, and the lignite beds occur within 300 feet of the summit.
Loess.
The substance to which this name is applied is a sandy calcareous loam of a yellowish brown colour, slightly coherent, and absorbing water with great avidity. It is a deposit which has been generally considered to be peculiar to the Rhine valley f, and it is found, to a great extent, at detached points on both sides of the river, from Basle to Bonn. It has not been noticed by previous writers on the district described in this paper with that attention to which its geological importance entitles it. Loess is specially noticed by Leonhard in his Char aider islik der Felsarten, published in 1824, who has adopted this trivial name, given to it in the neighbourhood of Basle but a fuller account of it has more recently been given by Professor Bronn§, in his description of the environs of Heidelberg, and from which I have put together the following particulars.
It is found on the sides of the hills next the Rhine valley, and penetrating into the side valleys, such as that of the Neckar, Mayn and Lahn, and occurs chiefly in those situations where the form of the land presented a barrier against its being washed away by a descending stream. It is, for example, more abundant near Worms and Oppenheim than near Heidelberg, because the force of the Rhine is chiefly directed there against its right bank. It is found at various distances from the plain of the Rhine, as much as nine miles, and it is in some places 600 feet above the level of the sea.
One hundred parts of that near Heidelberg yielded 50 per cent, of siliceous sand, 16 of argillaceous earth, nearly 32 of carbonate of lime, a trace of magnesia, and it was coloured by iron and manganese.
In the immediate vicinity of the primary mountains it has a somewhat different character, being more sandy, and containing mica.
The loess does not contain what can properly be called petrifactions, but a vast number of calcined land-shells of living species, more usually in the upper than in the lower parts of the deposit, and they seem to belong to particular horizontal beds. There have been found near Heidelberg the following species: Helix pomatia, H. nemoralis, H. hortensis, H. hispida, H. ericetorum, Bu- limus radiatus, B. lubricus, Lymneus ovatus. Some years ago, the lower part of an elephant’s tusk was found near Weinheim, at an elevation of 100 feet above the Rhine, and some fragments of elephants’ grinders had been previously found at a little distance from the same spot.
It is found lying on granite, porphyry, red sandstone, muschelkalk, keuper, and lias, and near Oppenheim on grobkalk (calcaire grossier).
The greatest elevation at which I have seen loess in the district described in this paper is near Erpel, above Orsberg, where it lies upon the brown-coal formation, a height which is fully 400 feet above the Rhine; and it occurs, at about 200 feet high, near Steinsbusch, above Honnef.
A very extensive deposit of it may be seen at the Bruckersberg, near Rhondorf, immediately south of the Drachenfels, where it forms an irregular mass from three to twenty-five feet thick, and covers trachyte and grauwacke, as represented in the wood-cut, p. 440. It is found at Quegstein in the valley of Konigswinter, covering trachyte tuff, and nearPaffroth and Ober Dollendorf, on the slope of the Petersberg, covering grauwacke. Between Ober Dollendorf and Haisterbach it lies upon grauwacke, covering the summit of a ridge over which the road passes, in the side of the valley leading to the Stenzelberg, and at Roth Kreuz, covering trachyte tuff. It is found in the narrow valley which opens at Ober Cassel, and covering basalt at a considerable elevation on the Raben- lei. It occurs also, to the depth of fourteen feet, near Utweiler, covering basalt. These are the places where I have seen it on the right bank of the Rhine ; but it is met with, no doubt, in many others. On the left bank a narrow ridge of it runs in a south-east direction from Bonn for about three miles ; and it is seen in the high bank of the river, covering the gravel of the Rhine plain, the surface of which is deeply channelled, the loess filling up the furrows. It is seen on the northwestern slope of the Kreuzberg, in the valley between the Kreuzberg and Venusberg; in a valley behind Godesberg, near Marienforst; to a considerable extent near Lannesdorf, where very deep clefts are cut in it; and it skirts the northern and eastern sides of the volcano of the Roderberg. Above Rolandseck there is a quarry of grauwacke, and upon the ends of the elevated strata of that rock lies gravel covered by loess. The basaltic columns in the quarry opposite to Unkel are covered by it at a very great height above the river, and where it is nearest to the basalt it contains rounded fragments of that rock. It is here, as elsewhere, an unstratified mass, which seems to have filled up deep furrows and irregularities of the preexisting surface. The absence of all signs of stratification is universal in this district. At Unkel it contains a considerable quantity of calcareous concretions.
The following are the shells which I have found in it in this district: they were named by Professor Goldfuss. Helix pomatia, H. nemoralis Linn., H. arbustorum Linn., H. hispida Linn., H. pulchella Drap., H. incarnata Drap., H. glabella Pfeilf., Lymneus minutus Drap., Pupa muscorum Linn., P. unidentata Pfeilf., Bulimus radiatus Drap., Clausilia obtusa Pfeilf.
Bones of Elephas primigenius and Rhinoceros tichorhinus have been found in the loess which covers the basalt in the Unkel quarry. In that near Lannesdorf I found a fragment of a rib belonging to an animal of the size of a horse or ox, and I obtained from the neighbourhood of Ober Dollendorf a few bones, which upon showing to my friend Dr. Muller, Professor of Anatomy at Berlin, he considered to belong to the lower jaw of a young individual of a species of deer.
It is remarkable that such a deposit should be almost devoid of all vegetable remains. They are not noticed by Professor Bronn and other writers, and I have never found any.
Valley of the Rhine.
The Rhine, from Linz downwards, flows through a deep deposit of gravel, with the exception of about three miles on the left bank, between Remagen and Rolandseck, where the hills come nearly to the water’s edge, and the grauwacke strata appear in the side and channel of the river. The gravel is composed for the most part of grauwacke and quartz, but the former predominates. It is very distinct in its character from that which covers the brown- coal beds on both sides of the river, in which quartz is the prevailing material, and which is usually of a bright yellow colour, from an admixture of oxide of iron, which I have never found to be the case in the gravel of the plain, deep sections of which are shown in pits in several places distant from the river. It is of an unknown depth; wells which have been sunk sixty feet have not passed through itf.
The plain which spreads out on both sides from the gorge near Rolandseck, has by no means an uniform flat surface : there are long low ridges in the direction of the stream, but not parallel to its present bed, which seem to indicate that the Rhine, previous to the historical epoch, had occupied a different channel from that in which it now flows: that at one time its course was very near the foot of the ridge from Ober Cassel to Kiidinghoven, and at another time close under the brown-coal plateau on the left bank, westward of Bonn. The situation of Cologne, founded in the early part of the first century, proves that it has flowed in its present course for at least eighteen hundred years.
Mineral Waters.
There are three springs of some celebrity ; at Roisdorf and Godesberg near Bonn, and at Heppingen near Landskron, in the valley of the Ahr. They are cold, and contain a considerable quantity of carbonic acid gas. Their contents, according to analyses which have been published, are as follow :
No mineral waters appear to have been found within the region of the Siebengebirge; and no water from which any calcareous deposit has been produced exists in any part of the district: there seems, indeed, to be an entire absence of limestone in any form. 
Of the relative Ages of the Sedimentary Rocks.
The oldest of these is the grauwacke, and, as I have already said, it has every appearance, in the more northern part of the district at least, of belonging to the latest periods of that formation. The whole series of the secondary rocks, from the grauwacke to the chalk, inclusive, is wanting; not a trace of them is to be found insitu in any part of the district4.
This brown-coal formation has been hitherto held by those who believe in the universality of tertiary formations, according to the types in the Paris basin, as belonging to the plastic clay; but on what grounds I have not seen stated. The clays, sands, sandstones, clay ironstone, pyrites f, gypsum, and the lignite itself, when without a recognisable organic structure, prove nothing as to age, for all these are found in formations much earlier and much later than the plastic clay. We can found no safe reasoning upon any other ground than upon a comparison of the organic remains with those in other deposits.
The Flora of the several brown-coal or lignite deposits has not yet been explored by a botanist of authority, with the exception of the short notices we have received from M. Adolphe Brongniart. It is to be hoped that in the future progress of his valuable general work he will direct his special attention to this branch of his subject. In his Prodrome d’une Histoire des Vegetaux Fossiles, published in 1828, he says, “ From all I have yet seen I do not believe that a single distinctly dicotyledonous leaf has ever been found in any “ formation older than the chalk. Future researches may prove the existence of such vegetable productions in the secondary periods, but it is at least certain that they are extremely rare, and that they did not begin to be very numerous until the period which succeeded the deposition of the chalk.” (p. 14S.) In speaking of the lignite formation, including those of the molasse and plastic clay, he says, “This formation is one of the richest in vegetable remains, but “it is however very rare to find them in such a state of preservation that they “ can be determined with any degree of precision ; or they belong to classes of plants in which the power of determination becomes much more difficult.” (p. 205.) He only alludes to the brown-coal of this district, by naming among the Palms " Cocos Faujasii” and under Monocotyledons of uncertain families
Endogenites both from Liblar. M. Alex. Brongniart, who has entered more fully into the subject of lignite than any other systematic writer I have met with, both in a special article on lignite in the Dictionnaire des Sciences Naturelles, and in his Tableau des Terrains, assigns this deposit to the plastic clay; but it is obvious that he has not visited the spot himself, and that what he says about it, as well as the above notice of it by his son, is taken in great part from the memoir of Faujas St. Fond, above quoted, who thirty years ago visited the Liblar mine only, and in whose memoir everything that relates to organic remains is far from satisfactory, in so far as regards observations on the spot by the author himself.
Now although the leaves of dicotyledonous trees may settle the question of this lignite deposit being superior to the chalk, they do not fix it to any particular epoch of the tertiary period, unless it can be shown that they have an equally limited range ; and it has not yet been ascertained what species of dicotyledonous leaves are peculiar to the earlier, what to the later beds of the tertiary series, and whether there be any common to all. So far, therefore, the present state of our knowledge of the fossil botany of the deposits above the chalk does not afford any sure criterion for determining the age of a bed.
The usual and most exact medium of identification, by the remains of molluscous animals, entirely fails in this case; for, with the exception of the siliceous mass or blocks at Marienforst, not a single shell of any description has been found in any part of this brown-coal formation. Now these are abundant in the lignite deposits of the Paris basin, of Soissons, of those in the mo- lasse of Switzerland, and in the great deposit in the valley of the Inn at Haring, which may be taken as types for comparison ; and, moreover, in all of these, marine shells are more or less mixed with those of fresh water. So far, therefore, all proofs of similarity fail; nor do we derive any aid from superior beds, as these are entirely wanting in this district. We are thus limited to the evidence which can be derived from the remains of fish, insects, reptiles, and the Marienforst shells.
Although found in considerable abundance, one species of fish only has been met with in this brown-coal formation, the Leuciscus papyraceus of Agassiz, and that belongs to fresh water. Now in none of the great lignite deposits above mentioned have the remains of fish of any kind been yet stated to have occurred; but Mr. Agassiz mentions that several species of the genus Leuciscus are found in the beds of CEningen.
With regard to the remains of Frogs, they do not appear to have been known to exist in a fossil state previous to the memoir of Professor Goldfuss on those found in the papierkohle of this district; for Cuvier says, under the head Des Ossemens de Batraciens, “ Je crois qu’il n’y a de certain que ceux “ des carrieres si problematique d’CEningen; ” and here he does not allude to Ran®. Mr. Murchison, however, in his late memoir on CEningen, when speaking of the collection of fossils from that place in the museum at Carlsruhe, says, " I observed specimens of Rana and Testudo.” I have had no means of ascertaining whether the same species of Salamander exists at (Eningen with that found in our papierkohle; but Professor Goldfuss informs me that the Salamander Ogygia is scarcely to be distinguished from the living species.
The insects in the papierkohle are another distinctive character of this brown-coal formation, for no such occurrence has been mentioned in any of the other great lignite deposits above alluded to, and two of those found in the papierkohle also occur at CEningen, viz. Anthrax and Ceramby.
It is impossible to decide whether the siliceous mass of Marienforst belongs to the lower or the upper part of the brown-coal formation, but the quartzose sandstones are always found in the lower part. As far as casts enable one to decide, and these only are met with, the species Planorbis rotundatus and Lymneus longiscatus have been made out by M. Deshayes. Mr. Lyell enumerates them in his Tables of shells, constructed on the authority of M. Deshayes, as occurring in his Eocene and Miocene periods, and not in the Pliocene.
It thus appears that there is no evidence to prove that this brown-coal formation belongs to the period of the plastic clay, and all the phaenomena seem to assign it to a more recent period, and they prove it to be of purely lacustrine origin. It seems to have been deposited in a vast inland lake of fresh water, fed by some great river or rivers, which brought the sand and clay and wood, that subsided gradually to the bottom ; and the perfect state of preservation of some delicate leaves shows also that the lake was surrounded by trees or shrubs.
I have been thus particular in endeavouring to fix the age of the brown-coal formation, not only on account of the great extent and importance of the deposit in itself, but because it affords, as I shall presently show, a criterion for judging of the period when the unstratified rocks of the Siebengebirge were ejected.
Of the relative Ages of the Volcanic Rocks to each other and to the Sedimentary Rocks.
The trachyte tuff appears to me to be the oldest of the volcanic eruptions, for it has nothing1 of the character of having been derived from preexisting trachytes, and it is traversed by a dike of trachyte, as I have described at p. 439. This is quite in accordance with what takes place in active volcanos, where nothing is more common than for an eruption of ashes to precede that of a stream of lava ; and it is also in accordance with what has taken place in another part of this district, at Siegburg, where dikes of basalt traverse basaltic tuff. The masses of solid trachyte contained in the tuff are not fragments, but, as was observed to me by Professor Mitscherlich while we were examining together the trachyte tuff of the Konigswinter Holle, are similar to the bombs we had found in such abundance in the ashes of the volcanos of the Eifel, and which are of frequent occurrence in the ashes of active volcanos They often, it is true, resemble, nay, are almost identical with, the trachyte of the adjoining hills, but they are very frequently of a kind unlike any found en masse. That there may be some secondary trachyte conglomerates is very probable; indeed I am inclined to consider that variety at Ober Cassel, containing portions of basalt and balls of clay ironstone, as having been derived from preexisting trachyte and trachyte tuff.
Previous writers on this district have said that they were unable to point out any difference of age between the trachyte and the basalt. I presume, therefore, that the dike of amygdaloidal basalt which traverses the trachyte in the Keilsbrunnen quarry must have been only lately exposed, for that is decisive of the question. Another proof of the basalt being more modern than the trachyte is, that the trachyte tuff, except in the case of that at Ober Cassel above alluded to, never, as far as my observations and information go, contains any detached masses of basalt. There is, besides, no instance of a trachyte dike traversing basalt, but many of the latter traversing trachyte tuff.
That the trachyte and basalt are later than the grauwacke requires scarcely to be mentioned ; the numerous fragments of it included in the volcanic rocks, and the basalt rocks traversing it, remove all doubt. The great disturbance of the grauvvacke strata in the neighbourhood of the trachyte and basalt may have been produced by their eruption.
It is clear that volcanic eruptions took place during the deposition of the beds of the brown-coal formation.
Trachyte tuff covers the sandstone at Quegstein, alternates with clay and clay ironstone in the neighbourhood of Rott and Utweiler, contains fragments of wood at the Langenberg, and leaves of trees, identical with those found in the papierkohle and sandstones, at Scheuern and Ofenkulenberg. The basalt tuff of Siegburg contains fragments of wood, bituminized and penetrated by iron, not to be distinguished from that found in the lignite deposits. In conformity with what has been said of the more modern age of the basalt, we find it at Utweiler lying over the brown-coal beds to the depth of thirty feet; and no fragments of basalt occur in any of the beds of the brown-coal formation, as far as I have been able to ascertain. Besides the instance of alternate beds mentioned above, the trachyte tuff in many places shows an arrangement that could only have been produced by the materials being moved under the surface of water.
All these facts seem to me to prove that volcanic eruptions were going on in a freshwater lake, in the same manner as we have submarine eruptions at the present day, during the time that the brown-coal beds were in the course of being deposited. It is probable, however, that all the volcanic rocks we now see were not ejected at that period, but that subsequent eruptions took place which heaved up the Siebengebirge and the cones to the south, carrying up the brown-coal beds along with them, in some instances, as at Stosschen, to the height of nine hundred feet above the present surface of the Rhine; the same action, probably, heaving up the plateau on the left bank of the river, although with a less degree of force, as the basaltic outbursts on that side are comparatively on a limited scale. The great fault in the brown-coal beds, described p. 459, indicates a powerful and sudden disturbing force. It would appear, also, that the great mass of gravel which covers the brown-coal beds had been strewed over them previous to this elevation, for it is found on both sides of the Rhine at a great height, and never in the intermediate plain, the gravel of which, as far as my observations go, has quite a distinct character.
I have endeavoured to obtain some distinct evidence as to the relative age of the volcanic eruption of the Roderberg, described p. 447, the whole characters of which are very different from anything in the Siebengebirge. I have not been able to find anything- more precise than that the loess at its base contains portions of scoriaceous basalt, and that a mass of the same gravel which covers the brown-coal formation, occurring at the edge of the crater, lies under a dark volcanic tuff, or indurated mud. Dr. Hibbert states that in the road from Andernach to Frauenkirchen he saw a section where a bed of pumice, twenty-one feet thick, lies over a fine loess from forty-five to forty- eight feet thick, and a coarser loess eighteen feet thick: he mentions other places, which show that the volcanos in the Lower Eifel were in activity subsequently to the deposit of the loess, and it is probable that this was also the case of the Roderberg.
Of the relative Age of the Loess.
This remarkable deposit, abounding in terrestrial and fluviatile shells of existing species, and containing in many places, some of which are more than two hundred feet above the Rhine, bones of extinct species of the elephant and rhinoceros, rests at Bonn, as it does at Strasburg, upon a deep mass of that same gravel through which the Rhine flows in the greater part of its course from Basle. It is the latest deposit found in this district prior to the commencement of the recent period.
It is difficult to conceive how it should have been produced, except by some vast flood, which, if no elevations or subsidences of the land have since taken place, must have been of the depth of at least six hundred feet, and several miles in breadth, and so densely charged with mud as to leave behind, at an elevation of two hundred feet, masses covering hundreds of acres, two hundred and fifty miles distant from the spot where its first traces are to be seen, similar masses occurring at intervals not far asunder during the whole of that course. That it was a sudden inundation, and that the loess was not gradually and tranquilly deposited from stagnant water is probable, from there being no signs of stratification, by its containing the remains of land and fluviatile shells, and of land animals only, and by the great rarity of vegetable remains in it. That plants and trees were not swept along by such a flood is extremely improbable; but they would obviously not sink in so dense a fluid, hurried along with such a velocity as that with which it must have moved. Had there been a gradual subsidence, not only would there have been stratification, but beds of lacustrine and fluviatile shells, and abundance of leaves and other vegetable remains. We must ascribe such a flood to the sudden bursting of the barrier of a vast lake, the volume of water rushing over a great extent of land, and becoming charged as it rolled along with the earthy contents it afterwards deposited in the lower part of its course. We know that in the upper part of the Rhine valley, between the lake of Constance and Basle, there must have existed at one time a vast freshwater lake, where the great deposits of limestone and marl at CEningen took place, forming a mass of horizontal beds, six hundred feet thick, counting from the present bed of the Rhine. That the discharge of the waters when these CEningen beds were laid bare was that which brought down the loess is, perhaps, even a conjecture too hazardous from one who has never been near the spot. To give a history of the loess in the valley of the Rhine, by a careful examination of its composition, organic remains, its form of deposition and levels, and to trace it, if possible, to its source, would be a most interesting subject of inquiry, and could not fail to prove a valuable contribution to geological science.
It was my intention to have compared this district with the great trachytic eruptions of Hungary and Central France, but I found that to do so to any useful purpose, I must have entered into details which would have extended this paper beyond all reasonable bounds.
Table of Heights.
The following heights are extracted from a Table of barometrical measurements, by M. Moliere of Saarbruch, Civil Engineer, a manuscript belonging to the Council of Mines at Bonn.
The measurements are in Paris feet, above the mean height of the surface of the Rhine at Bonn, which, according to Van der Wyck, is 193 English feet above the level of the sea. I have classed them according to the nature of the rock at each place. 
From the smallness of the scale to which my map has been reduced for publication, it is scarcely possible to define the boundaries of the several mineral formations with precision. Those who wish to examine the Sieben- gebirge will do well to provide themselves with a copy of a geological map published at Bonn in 1835 by Henry and Cohen.
M. Thomae, in the memoir cited in the next note, mentions the occurrence of trachyte tuff in the lane leading from Nieder Bachem to Liessem, p. 43.
A very detailed account of the Roderberg has been recently published, entitled Der Vulkanisehe Roderberg bei Bonn. Geognostische Beschreibung seines Kraters und seiner Umgebungen, von Carl Thomae. Bonn, 1835. Those who wish to examine and understand the structure of this interesting geological feature of the district should take this memoir as a guide. I extract the following particulars in this place, and I have refered to it in other parts of this Appendix.
The highest point of the crater is 330 Rheinland feet (339'8 English feet) above the surface of the Rhine. He estimates the longest diameter of it at a thousand paces, and the shortest at seven hundred paces.
The lava at the north-east side of the crater was at one time quarried, in the hope of obtaining millstones,, like those of Nieder Mendig; but it decomposes readily when exposed to the air, and masses of sufficient size without rents could not be had.
Fragments of grauwacke and of quartz are common in the lava; they are fast imbedded in it, and their surfaces are frequently vitrified. These vitrified pebbles are met with abundantly among the scoriae on the sides of the hill, varying in size from a foot to the tenth of an inch in diameter. " Any one,” says M. Thomae, " who had not picked them up himself on the spot from " among the brown cinders, might swear they came out of a porcelain furnace.” p. 17. Volcanic bombs are sometimes found, and some which M. Thomae " broke presented the following remarkable appearance. " Three almost per" fectly round balls, the largest of which might be about the size of a man’s " head, contained in the interior rapilli, small rounded portions of porous lava, " vitrified and non-vitrified quartz pebbles, and small fragments of grauwacke, " some friable, others vitrified, and some unchanged. The bodies, which were " of the size of nuts, filled the whole interior space of the bomb; they lay chiefly cf loose, often five or six were adhering together, or single ones were fixed to " the sides of the bomb, so that in breaking the porous lava shell, which was " about a finger’s breadth in thickness, great caution was necessary to prevent " the contents falling out. In the interior of one of the bombs there was a " small detached crystal of augite.” 
 Hitherto no shells have been found in our Rhenish brown-coal. Recently " some freshwater shells were brought to me from a bed which seems to be in" termediate between earthy brown-coal and bituminous (brown-coal) clay. " This bed, which is of inconsiderable thickness, covers the alternations of " compact clay ironstone, which occur near Rott, eastward of the Siebengebirge, an account of which is given in my Rheinland Westphalen, iv. p. 388. " You will see by the specimens sent herewith that the shells are changed into " a kind of brown-coal, and are almost quite flat. If M. Bronn will venture to "pronounce an opinion upon these, I should wish you to insert it along with "this notice in your journal.”
M. Bronn adds, " All these shells belong to the genus Planorbis, but they " are so crushed as to be almost wholly unrecognisable. The largest and best “ preserved specimen nevertheless appear to be Planorbis carinatus; the rest seem to belong to the same species.”
I visited the lignite deposit at Friesdorf in September 1835, in company with Mr. Robert Brown, when he collected several specimens of the vegetable remains. He informs me that all the wood he found is coniferous, which, taken along with the evidence derived from the leaves already noticed, might point rather to a temperate than an equinoctial climate.
M. Agassiz examined the specimens accompanying this paper, in a late visit to England. Besides the Leuciscus Papyraceus, he found another species, which he named Leuciscus Macrurus.
Since this paper was read, I have seen the loess in three situations, which are remarkable as connected with the geological events which, in comparatively recent times, have occurred in this district.
I learned in the summer of 1833, that, in the preceding spring, the proprietor of the farm in the bottom of the crater of the Roderberg, in sinking a well near his house, had passed through a bed of loess. I went there, accompanied by Mr. Lyell, and we ascertained that, after a few feet of scoriae, they had found loess, and had penetrated it to the depth of 62 Rheinland feet (63-2 English feet), but without passing through it. Part of that which had been dug out was on the ground near the well, the rest had been scattered over the adjoining field. It had the usual characters, and several of the calcareous stony concretions were lying about.
In the left bank of the Rhine, a short distance below Neuwied, and near Andernach, I observed the loess lying under a bed of volcanic scoriae, and that covered by a considerable thickness of alluvial soil.
On a visit to the Laacher See in September 1835, I observed a section close by the edge of the lake, and within a quarter of a mile of the monastery, where loess, containing its characteristic shells, is covered by a succession of beds of volcanic sand, scoriae, and pumice, and altered fragments of grauwacke.
In a paper on the solid contents of the Water of the Rhine, which was read before the Geological Society in March 1834, and published in the London and Edinburgh Philosophical Journal for January 1835, p. 102,1 showed that the sediment obtained from a large quantity of the water has the same appearance, and is of the same composition as loess.
In the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal for July 1834, there is a paper by Mr. Lyell on this peculiar deposit: he has treated of it very fully in his Principles of Geology,” vol. iv. p. 44, 4th edition; he read some additional observations upon it at the Geological Society in December 1835, an account of which is given in the Society’s “ Proceedings,” vol. ii. p. 221, and he again refers to it in his Address at the Anniversary of the Geological Society, in February, 1836.  M.Thomae, in the work above cited, has recorded several interesting facts respecting the loess which lies around the Roderberg. We learn, from the observations of these gentlemen, the following particulars in addition to those mentioned in my paper.
Of the shells found in the loess near Bonn the terrestrial predominate greatly over the aquatic; the same rule holds good, though not to the same extent, with respect to the shells now drifted down by the Rhine, and contained in the mud and sand of its shores; and the greater proportion of these last agree specifically with those buried in the loess.
The loess absorbs water with great avidity, and where exposed to the action of water is often carried away in great masses. It affords a very fertile soil; but the husbandman is sometimes doomed to see his hopes blasted by a violent storm of rain washing away the whole soil from his field, laying the roots of his vines bare to the sun.
On the east side of the Roderberg there are five round-back ridges, covered with vegetation, which seem to radiate from the lower part of the hill towards its base. These are composed of loess; and, at their inferior extremity, are in some places laid open, exhibiting a vertical section from twenty to thirty-five feet in height, resting upon a mass of gravel, identical in composition with that forming the present bed of the Rhine, and from four to eight feet in thickness.
“ On the north-north-west side of the Roderberg a valley separates the volcano from the Zilliger Haidchen, heathy hilly ground composed of loess, which is furrowed in several places to a great depth. These excavations are called in German schluchten, meaning hollow ways. In some of these the loess is seen to be intermixed with volcanic products, and containing detached accumulations of scoriae in amorphous masses. In several places there are continuous beds of scoriae lying upon and covered by loess. In one of the schluchten a section is exposed, exhibiting alternate layers of scoriae and tuff, resting on the fundamental grauwacke, and covered by loess; in another a volcanic breccia, composed of fine blackish grey sand, including small fragments of clay slate and grauwacke five feet thick, rests upon loess, and is covered by another deposit of loess fifteen feet thick, identical in composition with the lower deposit. The flat surfaces of the slate and grauwacke fragments, and numerous scales of mica, lie horizontal, producing a slaty structure, and indicating their having assumed that position under the surface of water.' The schlucht, which opens towards the village of Lannesdorf, exhibits a similar intermixture of scoriae in the loess, and it is about two miles and a half distant from the crater of the Roderberg.
I shall now point out some of the more important observations of Mr. Lyell on the loess in the higher parts of the Rhine valley and the adjacent country, contained in the memoirs above mentioned, which throw light on the history of this remarkable deposit.
He observed it near Andernaeh, alternating with volcanic scoriae, &c., and in one place “ covered with beds of pumice, trassy pumiceous sand, and small dark volcanic cinders, forming upon the whole a mass from ten to fifteen feet in thickness,”—ejections from the neighbouring volcanos of the Lower Eifel. In an excursion through part of the duchy of Darmstadt by Mayence, Oppenheim, Alzey, Flonheim, Eppelsheim, and Worms, he found the loess spread almost everywhere over the country. On the opposite side of the Rhine, in the elevated table land above the Bergstrasse between Wiesloch and Bruchsal he observed the loess attaining a thickness of 200 feet. Near Strasburg large masses of it are seen at the foot of the Vosges mountains on the left of the great plain of the Rhine, and at the base of the mountains of the Black Forest on the other side. It occurs in considerable force at Basle, and still higher up the Rhine at Waldshut, and it is said to terminate between that place and Schaffhausen. In the hills called Bruder Holz, about two miles south of Basle, it rests upon nearly horizontal beds of molasse, and it has here an elevation of more than 1100 feet above the sea, which is more than 900 feet above that ridge of loess that stretches between Bonn and Riingsdorf. In a section exposed at Bruder Holz, he found the usual terrestrial and aquatic recent shells, and along with them two vertebrae, which M. Agassiz says belong decidedly to a small species of the Squalidae, or Shark family, perhaps to the genus Lamna. Mr. Lyell has been so good as to allow me to have figures taken of these organic remains, the first ichthyolites hitherto found in the loess and so remarkable in a freshwater deposit.
Ascending the valley of the Neckar, he found a section near the Manheim gate of Heidelberg, exhibiting alternating layers of loess and gravel, to the thickness of 12 feet. He saw it near Heilbronn at an elevation of 500 feet above the level of the sea, and was informed that it lies on the hills in that neighbourhood, 300 feet higher. Further up the Neckar, at Canstadt, near Stutgardt, it overlies a freshwater formation of tuff travertine and marl, and south-east of Stutgardt, between Giippingen and the little watering-place of Boll, he found it in a valley watered by a small tributary of the Neckar. From Goppingen his route lay eastward by Weisenstein and Heidenheim to Nordlingen, and between Weisenstein and Heidenheim he crossed elevated land, on the west side of which the waters flow to the Rhine, on the east to the Danube, and eastward of this ridge no more loess was to be seen.
Returning again to the tributaries of the Rhine, in proceeding westward from Bamberg in Bavaria, he found the loess at Dettelbach, a small town on the Mayn, eastward of Wiirtzburg; and not only in the valley, but on the neighbouring hills of muschelkalk, at a height of five or six hundred feet above the valley. It was here of a somewhat redder tint than in Wiirtem- berg, and Mr. Lyell conjectures that the colouring-matter may have been derived from the neighbouring red bunter-sandstein. Lower down the Mayn, he again saw the loess at Hochst below Frankfurt, and at Soden, where it abuts against the elevated grauwacke ridge of the Taunus.
Crossing the Taunus to the valley of the Lahn, he again found the loess at the village of Elz near Limburg. “On the north of this village,” he says, “ is a hill, which forms one boundary of the valley of the Lahn, and here loess is seen with all its usual characters, with many land and freshwater shells, and alternating, as at Heidelberg, with gravel. I observed, in particular, a horizontal layer of white quartz pebbles, a foot and a half in thickness, resting on a mass of loess fifteen feet thick, and covered by loess five feet in thickness, the loess, in both situations, including in it entire shells. Following the road, I found the slope of the hill above to consist of horizontal beds of quartz pebbles, which have a base of loess. Hence it appears that the valley of the Lahn, which is excavated through highly inclined greywacke, has, at some period since its excavation, been partially filled up with beds of gravel alternating with loess, a great part of which has since been removed by denudation.”
It is material to observe that all the above-mentioned places, where Mr. Lyell observed the loess, have a direct communication with the main valley of the Rhine ; that is, form part of one hydrographical basin. The quantity left bears but a small proportion to the mass which we must suppose to have been originally deposited. It has been shown that the great avidity with which it absorbs water, renders it liable to be easily washed away ; and accordingly, wherever it is not protected by the form of the land, or by a dense covering of vegetation, it is carried off by every shower ; and this is in a great degree the cause of the yellow colour and the muddy state of the Rhine after heavy rains.
In a gravel-pit near Bonn, I found a tooth of the Rhinoceros tichorinus. The gravel is not that yellow alluvium which lies over the brown-coal formation, but resembles that of the present bed of the Rhine, and which I have shown to be older than the loess.
Trachyte tuff is intermixed with the upper beds of the brown-coal formation in the lane between Nieder Bachetn and Liessem, on the left bank of the Rhine.
We have seen that from the volcanic focus of this district, limited though it be in extent, products have been erupted which differ very much in their nature, and that these different products must have been ejected at distinct periods. The trachyte tuff appears to have been the first eruption, then trachyte, then basalt, and lastly, the lava and scoriae of the Roderberg, which resemble the ejections of the neighbouring Eifel, and partake very much of the characters of those of active volcanos whose productions have more of an augitic than a felspathic nature.
That there was an eruption from the Roderberg subsequently to the commencement of the deposit of the loesss, is proved by the thick beds of scoriae which are incumbent upon loess near Lannesdorf; and that it had become extinct prior to the termination of that particular deposit is shown by beds of loess covering the volcanic ejections, and still more conclusively by its accumulation to so great a depth in the very bottom of the crater; for had the volcano been subsequently in activity, the loess must have been blown into the air. That the edge of the crater must, in part at least, have been under the surface of the water which transported the loess, is manifest, and that collected at the bottom is probably the amount of the solid contents of the fluid which filled the cavity. All the phaenomena seem to lead to the conclusion, that the Roderberg was a subaqueous eruption during the period of the loess, and that it was subsequently raised up gradually, en masse, into its present position.
The additional facts which have come to my knowledge since this paper was read, the most important of which are narrated in the preceding notes, have led me to modify in some degree the opinions I had formed relative to the history of the loess.
Its origin remains as uncertain as before; but it is very evident that it came from above Schaffhausen ; and as it is so uniform in its nature throughout, with the exception of the somewhat redder tint of that at Dettelbach on the Mayn, which may have been produced by some local intermixture, it is fair to presume that it was derived from one source.
Do its characters indicate that it was brought down by the water of the Rhine, and was deposited gradually during a long period; or, that it subsided in a vast lake, into which the Rhine then entered, as the Rhone now does into the lake of Geneva, and whose waters ran up into all those sinuosities of the land where remains of the deposit are still to be found or, do they point to the sudden rush of a muddy torrent, occasioned by the bursting of a barrier which drained a vast lake, as I have already suggested ?
The generally homogeneous unstratified nature of the loess, even though in masses between 200 and 300 feet in thickness, always appeared to me to be strongly presumptive evidence that it was deposited from a flood of water densely loaded with mud, and moving with a velocity sufficient to transport its solid contents to a distance so great as that from Basle to Bonn, before they had time to fall to the bottom ; but the alternations of loess with gravel in the valleys of the Neckar and the Lahn, and with volcanic ejections around Andernach, the Laacher See, and the Roderberg, show that, if it was a flood, there must have been more than one.
Were the idea of a lake at all admissible, there would be nothing extravagant in supposing that the loess near Basle, which is more than 1100 feet above the level of the sea, and that of Bonn, which is less than 200 feet, might have been deposited in one and the same lake ; for it is only supposing the water at the latter place to be 900 feet deep; and the lake of Geneva, according to Mr. De la Beche, is in some places 984. But if the loess were a gradual deposit from the waters of a lake, there would surely have been indications of successive layers in the structure of the loess itself; the shells would have been found more frequently in something like a similar mode of arrangement, in plaee of being scattered, as they generally are, without order through the mass; and vegetable remains would not have been entirely wanting; or so rare, if they do exist. Then there must have been a barrier to contain the waters of the lake, at the head of the delta of the Rhine near Bonn, and that barrier must have been wholly swept away; but a country with forms more unlike those which we might expect, had such a barrier ever existed, can hardly be imagined.

Ail the appearances of the Rhine valley favour the supposition that, at the time of the deposit of the loess, there was a free river communication between Basle and the sea, and the vertebras of the Lamna certainly render that supposition more probable. cc It may seem very extraordinary that the first remains of fossil fish obtained from this freshwater silt should belong to a marine genus, but M. Agassiz has informed Mr. Lyell that both in the Senegal and the Amazon certain species of the Shark and Skate families (Squalus and Raia, Linn.) have been known to ascend to the distance of several hundred miles from the ocean, and analogous facts are referred to in Alargrave and Pisa’s Natural History of India.”
In a work descriptive of Bonn and its neighbourhood f, there is the following statement. “ The chronicle of Bonn further informs us of a visit to “ our river from an animal of the remote north ; a sea monster, whose appearance may be brought forcibly before our imagination by the steam-boat of modern days, as it works its way through the w aters of the Rhine. In the beginning of the year 1680, a Sea Cow, or Walrus, more than fourteen feet in “ length, was seen swimming up the Rhine past Bonn. A violent and unheard- “ of agitation of the water was observed, accompanied by a loud noise, and by “ two lofty jets of water spouting from the forehead of the monster. The whole ec town rushed to the river to see the great beast, the very name of which was “ then unheard of by them. The centinel on the Alten Zoll fired at it several “ times but missed it, and the animal proceeded on its way upwards undis turbed, and is said to have got above Strasburg. Two months afterwards, it “was cast ashore dead, near the village of Niel, about three miles below Cologne, with four wounds from bullets below the head ; but it was not known “ by whom or where it had been killed.”
In the present imperfect state of our knowledge, there seems to be no explanation, upon the whole, so rational as that suggested by Mr. Lyell in the Address above alluded to, who says, “ Instead of supposing one continuous “lake of sufficient extent and depth to allow of the simultaneous accumulation “ of loess at all heights and throughout the whole area where it now occurs, I “ conceive that subsequently to the period when the countries now drained by “the Rhine and its tributaries, acquired nearly their actual form and geographical features, they were again depressed gradually by a movement like that “ now in progress on the west coast of Greenland. In proportion as the whole “ district was lowered, the general fall of the waters between the Alps and the “ ocean was lessened, and both the main and lateral valleys, becoming more “ subject to river inundations, were partially filled up with fluviatile silt containing land and freshwater shells. After this operation, when a thickness of many hundred feet of loess had been thrown down slowly,and in the course of “many centuries, the whole region was once more upheaved gradually, but “ perhaps not equally, throughout the whole region. During this upward movement most of the fine loam was carried off by denudation to such an extent that “ the original valleyswrere nearly re-excavated. The country was thus restored “ to its pristine state, with the exception of those patches of loess still remaining, “ and which, from their frequency and their remarkable homogeneousness of “ composition and fossils, attest the original continuity and common origin of “ the whole.- By introducing such general fluctuations of relative level, we may “ dispense with the necessity of erecting and afterwards removing a great “ barrier more than 1200 feet high, sufficient to exclude the ocean from the “ valley of the Rhine during the accumulation of the loess.”
Sweden has afforded the most unequivocal proofs that upward and downward movements of the land may take place in countries where no ordinary volcanic action is to be seen ; and that so gradually, as to be imperceptible to all who are not watching the phaenomenon : and, as there are so many indications of volcanic action in early times, on both sides of the Rhine valley, it does not seem to me to be stretching theory beyond the limits of just philosophical reasoning, to suppose that such oscillations may have taken place in this district, during the gradual accumulation of the loess, and subsequently to its deposition.

