       THE town of Droitwich is situated nearly in the centre of Worcestershire, about six miles from Worcester, on the road to Birmingham. For a very long time the manufacture of salt has been carried on to a great extent in this place, and as I am not aware of the existence of any detailed account of the natural and chemical history of the brine springs from which it is procured, I take the liberty of laying before the Society some observations which I made on the spot in October, 1810, together with the results of some experiments I have since made, with the view of determining the chemical composition of the brine. 
       The brine-pits are in the centre of the town, situated in a narrow valley, in the bottom of which runs the small river Sal-.' warp. The sides of the valley rise rather abruptly from the river. Doder Hill, on the right bank, which appeared to me to be the highest of the two sides, I measured with the barometer, and found it to be about eighty feet above the bed of the river.
   § 3. The prevailing rock around Droitwich is a fine-grained cal- careo-argillaceous sandstone, of a brownish red colour, with occasional patches and spots which are greenish blue. At Doder Hill, where a vertical section of it is exposed, it contains beds of a greenish-grey colour, and of a more indurated texture, but which do not appear to differ materially in composition from the red sandstone. These contain slender veins of crystallized gypsum, the forms of which are very distinct, where the widening of the vein has produced small cavities. I did not observe any gypsum in the red sandstone. The stratification is horizontal, and both the red and the grey rocks, where they are exposed to the air, crumble down into small pieces. I did not discover any traces of organic remains.
   This sandstone is the same as that which Mr. Aikin has described as occurring to so great an extent in Shropshire and Staffordshire, and which he considers to be the old red sandstone of Werner. He has also stated that it is found in this district, but as he does not trace it to any particular spot beyond Droitwich, I may here observe, that it appears to me to be the same as that which I found on the banks of the Severn, J between twelve and thirteen miles from this place ; and I have great reason to believe that it continues without interruption throughout the whole of that extent, and even for some miles to the south of the spot I have just named.
   Mr. Aikin observes that the red sandstone of Shropshire does not effervesce with acids: in this respect, therefore, it differs from that of Droitwich, for both varieties of the sandstone effervesce pretty briskly for a short time, but that which is of a grey colour appears to contain the greatest proportion of calcareous matter.
   The extensive beds of rock-salt, and the brine-springs of Cheshire, according to Dr. Holland, are situated in strata of a similar nature.
   § 4. The surface soil which covers the red sandstone, contains large pebbles, generally about the size and shape of a goose’s egg, but often larger. Those which I examined consisted of compact bluish-grey quartz, very much resembling some varieties of flint and calcedony, and different varieties of coarse and fine-grained quartzose sandstones. These pebbles arc not found in great quantity, for, as I was informed by a labourer, they are picked off the surface of the fields for the purpose of mending the roads, no spot having been found in the neighbourhood, where they are sufficiently abundant to pay the expence of digging for them.
   § 5. With regard to the nature of the rocks through which the brine-pits were sunk, I have not been able to obtain any very distinct information, as no new pit has been made for the last thirty years. All that I have in my power to lay before the Society on this subject, is the account contained in Nash’s History of Worcestershire, together with some details I received from an inhabitant of Droitwich, who was on the spot at the time the last pit was dug. The following is the information given by Dr. Nash.
   I was informed by an old man who assisted in sinking Walker's pit, that they sunk through soil, gravel, red marly clay, blue and white stone, hard rock, and talc, and that they came to the brine at the depth of 50 yards from the surface ; that for the first 15 yards they cut out a shaft, about 8 feet square, this they coated with clay, and afterwards lined with planks, to prevent the springs of fresh water, which are found at that depth, from mixing with the brine. At this depth of 15 yards they found the hard rock, and they then bored a hole of about 4 inches in diameter through this hard rock until they came to the brine, which they found at the depth of 35 yards farther ; when they came to the brine, the borer suddenly fell 22 inches, thus indicating the depth of it. As soon as the rock was penetrated, the brine rushed rapidly through the hole, the mouth of which the workmen were obliged to stop, until they got out of the pit. When the plug was withdrawn, the brine quickly rose to the surface and overflowed. 
   § 7. There are several pits on both sides of the river, but chiefly on the south side. The greater number of them, however, are not used, and the whole of the present extensive works are supplied from four pits. Indeed, the quantity of brine that is used bears but a small proportion to that which is allowed to run to waste ; for, except when the reservoirs are filling, the brine is constantly flowing into the adjoining canal, through a channel cut for the purpose, near the mouth of the pits. 
   § 8. The four pits that are worked at this time are distinguished by the names of Walker’s Pit, Walwyn’s Pit, Romney’s Pit, and Stuckey’s Pit. From each of these I obtained a bottle of the brine, for the purpose of submitting it to chemical examination. I also procured a bottle of the brine from Farley’s Pit, on the north bank of the river, but which is not now worked.
   I shall now lay before the Society the details of the process I adopted in this analysis.
Analysis.
   § 9. The brine from all the pits is perfectly limpid, and when held in a tumbler is colourless ; a greater body of it, however, has a pale greenish hue, similar to that of sea-water. It has remained equally clear at the end of a year and a half in a bottle closely corked and no change of transparency was produced, when left exposed to the air in an open vessel, for several days.
   Its taste is intensely saline, but without any degree of bitterness ; neither is there any bitter taste in the crust which is deposited at the bottom of the pans, after several successive portions of brine have been evaporated.
   The temperature of the brine in the pits, a few feet below the surface, differed very little from that of springs in general. It was 55°. 
	§,10. Specific Gravity, and Amount of the solid Contents.
   The specific gravity of the several lews:
   Four cubic inches of brine were evaporated to dryness very slowly, in a heat which was not suffered to rise above 212 , and towards the close of the evaporation it was kept between 170° and 1809. The residuum, was reduced to powder, and again kept for an hour in a heat of about 180°. The different brines yielded the following
quantities of entire salt.
   This variation in the strength of the different brines is probably owing to the mixture of the fresh-water springs in different proportions. Farley’s pit, which is the weakest, is perhaps so on account of the brine not being agitated by pumping, whereby the lighter fresh water will only mix with the brine in the upper part of the pit: the bottle of it which I obtained was from near the surface.
   















