It is said that the greater number of the precious stones have been been, at different times, discovered in the mountainous districts of Scotland; but hitherto no accurate account of them has been published. This is owing to a deficiency of mineralogical skill, and the interested motives of the discoverers, who have always endeavoured to conceal the knowledge of the spots where these stones have been found. According to the jewellers and lapidaries of Edinburgh, the ruby occurs at the Ely in Fifeshire, also near Portsoy in Banffshire, in Invernesshire, and Aberdeenshire; the emerald at the mountains of Cairngorum in Aberdeenshire; the aqua marine, or precious beryl, at Invercauld, and in the different Orkney Islands; the sapphire in different places of the Highlands, as at Benachie and Invercauld in Aberdeenshire, and Portsoy in Banffshire; the amethyst at Invercauld, and in Strathspey, and other parts of Scotland; the garnet abundantly in Aberdeenshire, and other parts of Scotland: and lastly, the topaz, is said to occur frequently in Strathspey, at Invercauld in Aberdeenshire, Cairngorum, and in the Isle of Arran. But are all these true precious stones? The ruby of the Ely, and the other places already mentioned, cannot be referred either to the spinelle ruby, or the red sapphire, which is the oriental ruby of jewellers. The mineral found at the Ely is not unlike the Cinnamon-stone of Werner, which I consider as a species of the garnet family. The Emerald of Cairngorum and Strathspey, and the aqua marine of Invercauld, are varietes of precious beryl; and the aqua marine of the Orkney islands,  the specimens in the late Dr Walker’s cabinet be truly from that quarter, is also precious beryl. The sapphire of the Highlands, from the examination of specimens in the possession of  Mr Deuchar, is a pale celandine green coloured topaz. The Amethyst is the true amethyst of mineralogists. The Topaz of Cairngorum, Isle of Arran, and other places, is rock-crystal of various colours, as yellowish-white, clovebrown, wine-yellow, and orange yellow. The clove-brown varieties are named smoke topaz; the orange and wine-yellow varieties are sometimes sold as true topaz. The Garnet is the precious garnet of Werner; the Syrian or oriental garnet of many jewellers.
It thus appears, that precious beryl, topaz, amethyst, and precious garnet, are the only true gems hitherto discovered in Scotland. But the topaz of Scotland has been considered as a variety of sapphire, and its true nature was not understood until lately, when its characters were fully exhibited in a fine series of topaz-crystals of remarkable size, brought from the upper part of Aberdeenshire to Edinburgh, and now in the possession of Mr White, lapidary.
The form of the largest crystal is an oblique eight-sided prism, deeply bevelled at the extremity; the bevelling plans set on the acute lateral edges; the proper edge of the bevelment truncated, and the angle formed by the meeting of the bevelling plane and the lateral planes bevelled. The surface of the crystal is rough, owing to attrition. 
This crystal weighs 7 ounces 3 pennyweights 18% grains Troy; and a fragment of a crystal, from the same tract of country, now in the possession of Mr Farquharson of Invercauld, weighs 1 pound 3 ounces 8 drams, and 8% grains Troy weight. These are the largest topazes hitherto found. In the National Museum at Paris, which is the most extensive in Europe, the largest topaz is one weighing 4 ounces 6 gros. The discovery of so valuable a gem in this country, naturally leads us to enquire in what situation it is found, and whether or not it is likely to occur in considerable quantity. Unfortunately the data for answering these questions are not complete: we must, therefore, at present rest satisfied, with a short statement of the geognostie relations of the topaz of foreign countries, which, when compared with the accounts given of our topaz, will enable us to guess at its probable geognostic situation. This gem occurs in considerbale quantity in the Electorate of Saxony, in a species of mountain-rock, denominated, by Werner, Topaz-rock, because topaz is one of its essential constituent parts. Besides forming an essential ingredient of topaz-rock, it also occurs in it in drusy cavities, along with quartz crystals and lithomarge. In Bohemia and Saxony, it occurs in veins that traverse gneiss and mica-slate. These veins are generally narrow, intimately connected with the rock they traverse, of very old formation, and contain, besides veins in primitive mountains, and robably also in large drusy cavities, in rocks of a very old formation. About 25 leagues north from Catharinenburgh, in the Uralian Mountains, topaz is found in considerable quantity, in a kind of granite, resembling that variety, known under the name of pierre graphique. There it is said to occur in drusy cavities, along with quartz and precious beryl. It is also found in the opposite extremity of Siberia, in a mountain named Odon-Tschelon, in the province of Dauria, where it occurs in druses, along with precious beryl. The topazes of Odon-Tschelon, and, indeed of Siberia in general, are generally snow white, frequently celandine green, and very rarely of a beautiful blue, resembling the sapphire; and some varieties exhibit a kind of opalescence. The Brazilian, and sometimes also the Saxon topaz, are found in alluvial soilt ; and the topaz of Pegu, Ceylon, Hawkesbury River in New Holland, and Cape Barren Island in Basses Straits, has a similar geognostic situation. Such are the geognostic relations of the topazes of foreign countries. The topaz of Scotland has hitherto been found only in alluvial soil, along with uncommonly large rock crystals, and middle-sized crystals of precious beryl, and in a tract of country, as far as we know, entirely composed of primitive rocks; and hence it is highly probable, that its original repository is in a primitive country. But in which of the primitive rocks is it probable that the topaz is contained, and in what kind of repository does it occur?  The tract of country where our topaz is found, is said to be principally composed of granite, and to contain, besides, considerable portions of gneiss and mica-slate. This being the case, it is probable the topaz will be found in one, or possibly in all these different rocks. It may, however, be alleged, that, I' the topaz-rock also occurs there, and that the topaz may be derived from it. But the topaz-rock is one of the rarest of the mountain-rocks, and the topaz which it contains has always a yellow colour, and differs somewhat in regular form from the topaz of Scotland; it is also smaller, and is never accompanied with rock crystal or precious beryl. Hence it is not probable, that the topaz-rock occurs in the districts of which we are treating. If, then, the topaz rock is wanting, it will be inquired in which of the primitive rocks, already mentioned, we are to look for it. Some may be of opinion, that it occurs in veins, in gneiss, or mica-slate, as is the case with the Bohemian and certain varieties of the Saxon topaz. The want of all the accompanying minerals, as tinstone, arsenic pyrites, copper pyrites, fluor-spar, &c. render this supposition improbable. But the topaz of Siberia agrees with that found in Aberdeenshire, in having green and white as its most frequent colour; in opalescence; in figure, being generally bevelled at the extremity; in size, the largest topazes being found in Siberia; and in accompanying minerals, which are usually tock-crystal and precious beryl.
Lastly, the Siberian topaz is said to occur in drusy cavities, or veins in granite, and in considerable quantity. If this account be correct, we may infer that the Aberdeen topaz will be found in drusy cavities or veins in granite, and in considerable quantity.
I trust, the conjecture I have now suggested, will induce mineralogists to examine the tract of country, where this interesting mineral is found.
Topaz has lately been found embedded, in small crystals, in transition rocks. Dr Monro junior presented me with a rolled piece of topaz, said to be from Hawkesbury river; and Captain Laskey, with a crystal of the same gem, from Cape Barren Island, in Basses Straits. The topaz of Basses Straits, as my learned Friend Mr R. Brown informs me, was first discovered by Mr Hunphry junior who was, some years ago, sent out by Government to examine the mineralogy of New Holland and Van Diémen's Island. In the collection of the Museum of Natural History at Paris, there is a large rock crystal, containing reddish coloured crystals of topaz from Brazil. 



