The memorable voyages of Davis in the years 1585, 6, and 7; of, Hudson in 1610; of Baffin in 1616; and of Fox, Ellis, and Middleton, in succeeding periods, may be considered as the principal sources of  the discoveries made in the countries to the northward and westward of Cape Farewell, the most scouthern point of West Greenland. The many considerable Sounds discovered by these navigators in Bafiin’s Bay and Hudson‘s Bay, have always been considered as objects of great geographical interest  and various circumstances have led to the opinion, that some, if not all of them, communicate with the Polar Sea, thus affording a hope of their leading to the discovery of the long sought for North-West Passage around the northern coasts-of America, through Behring's Strait, into the Great South Sea. Mr Ellis, in his interesting work, entitled, “ A Voyage to Hudson’s Bay,” infers from the following, amongst other circumstances, that a passage leads through some of the Sounds on the north side of Hudson’s Bay into the Polar Sea; that in inland seas, having but small outlets, there is little or no tide; that in such places, what tide there is, rises highest in the inlet, where the sea is narrowest, and becomes less and less consider able, in proportion as the sea enlarges within; that the highest tides, in such situations, are occasioned by winds blowing into the inland sea, in the direction of its strait, communicating with the main ocean, or in the direction of the course of the tide on the exterior coast; and that the time of high-water is soonest at places near the entrance of the inland sea, and progressively later in other situations, according to their distance from the strait through which the tide flows. These facts he derives from observations on the winds and tides in the Baltic, Mediterranean, and other inland seas. From the application of these principles, Ellis proceeds to shew, that every circumstance with regard to the tides in Hudson’s Bay, is different from what would take place in an inland sea; and then concludes, that Hudson‘s Bay is not such a sea, but has some opening which communicates with the Frozen Ocean on the north-west. Just within the entrance of Hudson’s Strait, at Cary Swan’s Nest, the tide was found by Captain Fox to rise but six feet; whereas on the west side of the bay, where, from the great expansion of the waters, the tide, according to theory, ought to have been scarcely perceptible, it rises in different places ten, thirteen, and seventeen feet; The flood-tide on the west side of Hudson’s Bay flows towards the south; and the time of high-water is soonest the farthest towards the north ; both of which circumstances, supposing Hudson’s Bay to be an inland sea, with only one entrance from the east, should, Ellis conceives, according to the doctrine of tides, have been just the contrary. And, lastly the highest tides on both sides of Hudson’s Bay, are produced by north and north-west winds; whereas, were it an inland sea, it is clear, that east or south-east winds, blowing directly through the strait, or in the direction of the flood-tide without, would produce the highest tides. Hence he concludes, that the tide of flood flows into Hudson’s Bay, through some other entrance than that called Hudson’s Strait; not from Baflin’s Bay either, because the tide is there inconsiderable, but from the north-west or the Icy Sea; by which conclusion all the difficulties with regard to the tides are easily solved. This reasoning is so satisfactory, as to leave little doubt on our mind, that some of the inlets on the north coast of Hudson’s Bay, particularly that named Repulse Bay, and another to the eastward of it, lead into the Polar Sea. The exploration of these inlets will, we hope, be again attempted, if it should not previously be accomplished by Lieutenant Franklin’s expedition in its course eastward.
The opinion of geographers that West Greenland is probably an island, and that therefore Baflin’s Bay communicates with the Arctic Ocean through some of its Sounds, is founded on a variety of circumstances, of which the following may be enumerated. 1. The existence of a current setting from the north. 2. The floating of icebergs and of drift-wood to the southward by this current. 3. The fact of whales wounded in the sea around Spitzbergen having been caught in Davis’ Strait. 4. And, lastly, The insular position of the land, as represented on skins by the native inhabitants of the country. These, and many other facts of the same description that might be stated, warranted geographers in their conclusions, that Bailin‘s Bay was not shut up to the ‘north and west by continuous land ; but, on the contrary, was connected with the Polar Sea by Sounds, and excited a strong desire that an opportunity might be offered, of enabling navigators to examine these openings with greater care than had hitherto been the case. Accordingly, the Admiralty fitted out an expedition for Bailin’s Bay, placed it under the command of Captain Ross and Lieutenant Parry, and instructed them to endeavour, if possible, to make a passage from the Bay through some of the Sounds into the Polar Sea, and from thence to proceed onwards to the South Sea, through Behring’s Strait Of this expedition, an account has been already laid before our readers in the 1st volume of this Journal, from which it appears, that, from various untoward circumstances, several of the Sounds had not been thoroughly examined; and that although much important information resulted from Captain Ross’s investigation, still the grand object of the expedition remained unaccomplished. The learned all over Europe now took a great interest in the solution of this problem, in regard to the passage from Ballin’s Bay into the Polar Sea, and the enlightened g0vernment of this country having the same feeling, immediately ordered another expedition to be prepared.
Two vessels, the Hecla and Griper, were selected and provided with every comfort and convenience for the crews, who, it was supposed, might be obliged to winter in the polar regions.  The command was given to Lieutenant (now Captain) Parry, young, active, fearless, intelligent, and accomplished officer, Who was accompanied by Messrs Liddon, Beechy, and other officers, admirably fitted for the bold and dangerous enterprize on which they were about to embark. They were furnished with the best instruments for astronomical, meteorological, hydrographical, and, magnetical observations; and, we doubt not, were also amply provided with every means for collecting and preserving various objects of natural history. Meteorologists expected from this expedition numerous important details in regard to the climates of regions hitherto but rarely visited, or which had not before been seen by any civilized beings; and philosophers paused in V their speculations and calculations in regard to the magnetic poles and meridians, until the results of the various and important observations on the magnetism of the earth, which were to be made in regions where both theory and former experience had placed so many of the most interesting and important magnetical phenomena, should be made known. The hydrographer, too, anticipated the confirmation of many speculative views, and numerous additional facts in regard to the waters of the arctic regions; while the natural historian, embracing in his science all the varied productions of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms, felt an intense interest in the success of an enterprize, which, under fortunate circumstances of time and weather, he was confident would throw so much light, not only on the geographical and physical distribution of organized beings, but on the geognostical structure of unknown regions, and which was to furnish him with new views of arctic nature. And geographers, although confident that the passage into the Polar Sea was about to be effected, and that the expedition under Lieutenant Parry was to contribute in an eminent degree to our knowledge of the various forms and distributions of the polar lands, yet never entertained the visionary and vulgar fancy of a commercial passage into the South Sea.
All the preparations being finished, the ships took their departure from England on the 11th of May 1819. They reached Cape Farewell on the 14th of the succeeding June. On the 20th of June, the ships were in Lat. 64° N. : on the 26th of June, they were beset with the ice, and, after having endeavoured, but in Vain, to urge their way, were at last glad to get back again. Having reached the Lat. of 74° N., they determined to force a passage through the barrier of ice, which they found to be 80 miles broad. Having succeeded in this, they reached Possession Bay on the 3lst of July, where they landed in a rugged country, composed of granite, gneiss, and other primitive rocks; and on the 18th of August, entered in safety Sir James Lancaster’s Sound, a position now become so distinguished in geography, where they found the same open sea which had been described in the account of the former expedition. .They advanced to Long. 89° W. meeting with but little I obstruction from the ice; and in Long. 90° W. discovered two considerable isles, named, in honour of Prince Leopold, Leopold‘s Isles.  But at this point, their progress westward was interrupted by a strong barrier of ice, extending quite across from these islands to the north coast of what Captain Parry has named Barrow’s Strait. Being thus arrested by the ice, and forced to alter their course, they now entered a great inlet, of 141 leagues in breadth, which they found extending to the southward. They sailed along its eastern side, landed indifferent points, and in some places met with rocks of that kind of limestone named Stinkstone, from the peculiarly fetid odour it exhales when pounded. The middle and western part of this inlet, named Prince Regent’s Inlet, was blocked up with ice as far as Lat. 71° N. when their further progress southward also was found to be impossible, by reason of the ice. On their return to Barrow’s Strait, it was found that the barrier of ice extending across from Leopold’s Isles to the north coast, had broken up, so that now the ships were enabled to pursue their course westwards. Having reached Long. 92° W., they found the land on the north side of the Strait, which had been continuous from the entrance of Sir James Lancaster’s Sound, interrupted by a great inlet. Land, however, was still seen to the westward, and the expedition continued its course in that direction. In doing so, the ships passed[twelve large islands, which were named the Islands of New Georgia, in honour of his Majesty, and all of them were apparently more or less surrounded with ice; from which circumstance, partial detentions were unavoidable, and their course ran in a sort of zig-zag style, from Lat. ’74so N. to Lat. 7 5° N. They landed on several points on the north side of Barrow’s Strait, and found in different places extensive formations of limestone, some of the varieties being white marble, others of a duller aspect, and containing petrifactions of madrepores, and other similar animal marine productions, now found only in a living state in seas far to the south, principally in the ocean between the tropics. They landed also on an island, which was named Byam Martin’s Island. Here they met with various rocks of the primitive class, as gneiss, granite, and a variety of talc-slate, with numerous interspersed scales of brown mica. Resting on these older rocks, various newer rocks of the secondary class were met with, such as sandstone, clay ironstone, and stinkstone. The sandstone is white, principally composed of grains of transparent quartz, with a few scales of silver-white ’ mica. Sometimes the ironstone is imbedded in the sandstone, and occasionally the sandstone is much impregnated with iron pyrites, and in some masses was ironshot. The stinkstone was of the same description as that found in Prince Regent’s Inlet. Specimens of madrepores, slightly mineralized, were picked up, and these probably were derived from some neighbouring beds of limestone, or were connected with the stinkstone.
On the 4th of September they were in Long. 110° W. ; and here they discovered an island, which appeared to be larger than any that had hitherto been seen, and which was named Melville Island, in honour of the First Lord of the Admiralty. This island extends from Long. 106° W. to 114° W. On the 8th of September, the ships reached 112° VV., and were inclosed for several days in the ice. Winter was now fast approaching; the ice was rapidly increasing, and violent north-westerly gales kept it in a constant and dangerous state of agitation.
These circumstances, of course rendered the navigation very difficult, and began to endanger the safety of the ships. Our brave countrymen, however, continued to contend with these difficulties till the 22d of September, when it was evident to all that farther navigation was at an end for the season; and therefore prudence dictated their retreat to a secure haven for the arctic winter. For this purpose, they returned eastward, and found a harbour in Melville Island. But the ice had already formed nearly a foot thick, and therefore the crews were forced to cut a passage for three miles through it. The 28th September, in short, had arrived before they were fixed in their winter quarters, in five fathoms water, and within about 200 yards from the shore. The latitude of this harbour, named Winter Harbour, is 74° N. and Long. 111° W. Hitherto, they had never lost sight of a continuous barrier of ice to the southward; that is, from West 'Long.’90° to the extreme point of Melville Island.
Every thing was soon made ready for the formidable winter of these regions. The decks were covered with a housing composed of boards and sail-cloth, and pipes were passed in various directions around the vessel for conveying heated air. The thermometer was below the zero of Fahrenheit’s scale, when the expedition entered Winter Harbour. The sun entirely disappeared on the 1th of November. In the month of November, the spirit of wine thermometer was 50° below zero; and in February, the coldest month of these regions, the spirit of wine thermometer pointed to the 54° and 55° below zero; and we have been told that the mean temperature for twelve months, was found to be about 1;“ to 2° below zero. During these intense colds, the crews felt but little inconvenience, so long as they remained under the housing of the ships; but when the atmosphere was agitated by gales of wind, then the cold became tremendous, and every one was forced to seek shelter below. Scarcely any accident occurred from exposure to cold; while the constant and regular exercise, which formed a necessary part of the duty of the crews, kept every one lively, active, and free from disease. One death only took place during the expedition, and that was in the case of an individual who had contracted the disease of which he died before he left England.
When the sun had its greatest southern declination, a light was still perceptible at noon in the southern horizon, affording sufficient light to read a book with difficulty, The day was like the fine clear evening of winter in our climate. The stars shone with great brilliancy, and when the moon appeared in the firmament, she shone with uncommon splendour. The polar lights frequently made their appearance, and were generally of a yellowish-grey colour, sometimes green, but rarely red, and most commonly situated in the south-west. Their lustre was not particularly striking, no noise was heard to proceed' from them, and the magnetic needle did not appear to be affected by their presence.
The sun reappeared on the 8d of February, after an absence of eighty-three days, and his first rays were hailed from the mast-head.  In April, some partial symptoms of thaw appeared. By the end of May regular thaw commenced. Nearly about this time, Captain Parry, with a party of his officers and men, crossed Melville Island, and reached the sea on the opposite side, in Liddon’s Gulph, in Latitude 75° N. Here they discovered several other islands, one of which was named Sabine Island, in honour of Captain Sabine, one of the officers of the Expedition. They were fourteen days absent, during which time many interesting observations were made, and numerous specimens, illustrative of the natural history of the island, were collected. It is reported, that the skeleton of an immense whale was found some miles from the sea-shore. The rocks in the island appear to be partly primitive, partly secondary, and in various places there were considerable alluvial formations. The primitive rocks were red granite, sometimes passing into gneiss: gneiss, some varieties of which contained red garnets and minute crystals, apparently of hyacinth: milk-quartz, with intermixed grains of red fels ; and hornblende rock, with coarse serpentine, were observed in different quarters. On the shores of Liddon’s Gulph the red granite was found to abound with pistacite. Of the secondary rocks the most frequent was grey sandstone, which we were told was the most abundant rock in the island. It is principally composed of quartz, with fine scales of mica, and sometimes contains portions of browncoal, and ironstone, and also vegetable impressions. In one specimen the impression was of a species of the fossil genus, Lepidodendron of Sternberg, Palmacites of Schlotheim, and is one of those tropical looking trees of the palm tribe, frequently met with in our coal-fields. From this fact, and others already mentioned, it appears that the rocks of the new discovered lands contain, and not unfrequently, fossil remains of genera of animals and vegetables, that now no longer occur in a living state, but in the warmer parts of the temperate Zones, or in the tropical regions. Along with the sandstone were found masses of browncoal, containing mineral pitch; and we were informed that compact grey limestone, generally containing intermixed calcareous spar, was very abundant.
From the few specimens of the mineral productions of the newly discovered lands we have had an opportunity of seeing, and the accounts we received, it appears, that, in their nature and arrangement, they do not differ from those met with in the old world, thus shewing, that primitive and secondary rocks in all great tracts of country, have every where the same general characters and arrangement. The hills in Melville Island are not very high, and, we understand that, from the entrance of Lancaster Sound to Melville Island, the land became gradually lower and less rugged, till, from lofty and peaked summits, it became gently undulated.
Vegetables of various descriptions were collected on Melville Island, and we observed in a small collection, specimens of twenty-two different genera, of which the following is a partial list.
Vegetation was marvellously rapid, and some seeds brought from England, planted in Melville Island, were soon above ground. Shells of different kinds, various crustaceous animals, and many of the smaller corals and coralines were collected on the shores of this island. Few fishes were seen during the expedition, but considerable variety of the feathered tribe, and, amongst others, the owl, ptarmigan, arctic gull, glaucous gull, and that beautiful species, the king-duck, were killed in Melville Island. In the same quarter, we are informed, that the bear, arctic fox, hare, musk-ox, wolf and rein-deer, were not uncommon, and that a species of mouse was observed to change its fur from a brown to a pure white colour. No natives were met with in any of the newly discovered lands, but in Melville Island remains of huts were noticed by Mr Fisher, the assistant surgeon of the Hecla, and some others of the party who accompanied Captain Parry across the island.
On the return of the party, the ice in Winter Harbour was rapidly dissolving, and by the end of July it had entirely disappeared. Yet the ships were still blocked up by the exterior ice. It Was not until the 30th that the outside ice began to crack; on the 31st of July, it moved off very gently, and released the crew from their winter prison, where they had been shut up for 310 days. Capt. Parry, in his official communication to John Wilson Croker, Esq. Secretary of the Admiralty, says, “ He proceeded to the westward immediately on the breaking up of the ice at the commencement of the present season, the ships being in perfect condition, the officers and men in excellent health, and with every prospect of the final accomplishment of our enterprise. At the south-west end of Melville Island, however, the quantity and magnitude of the ice was found to increase so much, that for sixteen days (being above one-third of the whole navigable season in that part of the polar sea,) it was found impossible to penetrate to the westward beyond the meridian of 113° 47’ west. In order, therefore, that no time might be lost, I determined to try what could be done in a more southern latitude, and for that purpose ran back along the edge of the ice, which had hitherto formed a continuous barrier to the south of us, in order to look out for any opening which might favour the plan I had in view: in this endeavour I was also disappointed, and the season being so far advanced as to make it a matter of question whether, with the remaining resources, the object of the enterprise could now be persevered in with any hope of success, I consulted the principal officers of the expedition, who were unanimously of opinion that nothing more could be done, and that it was on that account advisable to return to England. In this opinion, it was impossible for me, under existing circumstances, not to concur, and I trust that the detailed account of our proceedings, which I shall shortly have the honour to lay before their Lordships, will prove highly satisfactory, and that though our exertions have not been crowned with complete success, they will not be found discreditable to the naval honour of our country.
Throughout the year, as we are informed, the wind blows almost constantly either from the north, or from northern points of the compass, in the sea discovered by Parry. As soon as the heat of the sun becomes powerful, the ice is released from the northern coasts, and driven towards the south. Thus, instead of the southern sides of bays, straits, and seas, affording open sea, it actually happens, that the openings exist on the northern sides, where prevailing north winds detach the frozen mass from the shore, and blowing it off, leave a passage between the ice and the land. On their return up Barrow’s Strait and Lancaster‘s Sound, the expedition reaped the benefit of this discovery, sailing on the north side, while, the south side was blocked up. From Hearne and Mackenzie having reported an open sea on the north coast of America, we would be inclined to suppose, that the heat of the American land loosens the ice, and that, by the prevalence of southerly winds, it is blown oil‘ the land, and driven northward, where it is dispersed by currents.
For the urgent and satisfactory reasons just stated, the further progress of the expedition was put an end to for the present, and although land was seen to the south-west in Longitude 118°, no accurate opinion could be formed as to its nature or extent. It is, we observe, named in the copy of the Admiralty Chart, engraved for this number of the Journal, Banks Land, in honour, we presume, of the late illustrious President of the Royal Society.
The expedition now returned eastward through the Polar Sea and Barrow’s Straits, into Sir James Lancaster’s Sound, thence into Baflin’s Bay, and, by the usual track homewards, arrived in safety, and the crew in perfect health, in England, during the course of the month of November.
Science will, we have no doubt, profit much by this expedition, and although it was locked up for the greater part of the time in ice, and enveloped in darkness, yet great activity and skill in a totally new field could not be employed but in a manner most advantageous to the high interests of philosophy. We have heard many interesting reports of the meteorological and magnetical observations, and the geographer must already see that the way to the Polar Sea has been discovered,—that Prince Regent’s Inlet is very probably one of the passages to Hudson’s Bay from the Polar Sea,—that the west side of Bailfin’s Bay and Davis” Straits are bounded, not by the mainland of America, but more likely by a chain of islands,--that West Greenland itself is not a portion of the Continent of America, but a great island, that the north coast of the Continent of America extends from Icy Cape by the sea of Hearne, down to Repulse Bay, or some other inlet, into Hudson’s Bay; and that to the north of this line of coast the the islands discovered by the expedition, and probably many others, whose examination is reserved for future navigators, who may follow the track of Parry and his intrepid companions.

