I SHALL now offer a few observations on the natural history of the Diamond, with the view of shewing that its geognostical distribution and modes of formation are probably more varied than has been generally believed. As opal and homstone agree in many of their geognostical relations with carbon, the essential ingredient of diamond, we shall first trace the various modes of distribution of these minerals, and then those of the diamond, in order to shew that they have been formed in the same manner, and that all of them appear to be still forming on the surface of the earth, in the newest alluvial formations, and probably even in vegetables.
Opal, which is a hydrate of silica, and eminently distinguished by the beauty of its range of external characters,—occurs in small veins and imbedded portions in various primitive rocks. But its principal distribution is in rocks of the secondary class, particularly in traps and porphyries. In these it is arranged in veins, drusy cavities, and imbedded masses, and assumes the various forms of precious opal, common opal, semi-opal, wood-opal, and menilite. The menilite and wood-opal are the most modern of these,-the first occurring imbedded in the adhesive slate of the Paris formation, the other in tufiaceous rocks, of the nature of trachyte. The opals are found sometimes so soft, that they can be flattened between the fingers. The alluvial rocks are not without opal, for it is daily forming by deposition, from the waters of various springs, particularly hot springs, as those of Iceland. From the magnitude and abundance of these springs, in many regions of the earth, and the quantity of siliceous matter they deposite, we can form a general estimate of the great quantity of opaline matter formed in this way. We have now traced opal, from the primitive to the newest rocks, thus proving that it is one of those minerals which have an extensive geognostical range, and which are still forming in the mineral kingdom; but one of the most interesting features in its natural history remains to be noticed. I allude to its formation by the organic powers of plants. It is well known to botanists, that silica occurs in considerable abundance in several tribes of plants, and that it communicates to the parts of the plants containing it, a considerable degree of hardness. The Bamboo is one of the most remarkable in this respect, as the earth it contains occurs not only in the vegetable structure itself, but is secreted from it, And appears in the joints of the plant, in solid masses, named Tabasheer, and which bear a strong resemblance to opal. We have thus shewn that opal is a formation of primitive, secondary, and alluvial strata; and finally, that it is a product of vegetables.
 We shall next trace the distribution and formation of hornstone. This mineral, which, in its pure state, is principally composed of silk, occurs in considerable abundance in several primitive rocks. It appears also in rocks of the transition-class, and is associated with different secondary rock formations. Wood, penetrated with hornstone, occurs occasionally in alluvial strata, as in clays and sands of various kinds, and exhibiting such characters, as shew that the petrifaction or penetration of the wood with the hornstone, had taken place in it after it was enveloped in the days and sands. Like opal, hornstone seems to be a product of vegetable origin; for the specimen which I now exhibit to the Society is a variety of woodstone. This remarkable specimen, which is 18 inches long, 5 inches thick, and 8 inches broad, was tom from the interior of a log of teakwood, in one of the dock-yards at Calcutta. The carpenters, on sawing the log of teakwood, were arrested in their progress by a hard body, which they found to be interlaced with the fibres of the wood, and, on cutring round, extracted the specimen now on the table. This fact naturally led me to conjecture, that the mass of wood-stone had been secreted by the tree, and that in this particular case, a greater quantity of silica than usual had been deposited; in short, that this portion of the trunk of the tree had become silicified, thus offering to our observation in vegetables, a case analogous to the ossifications that take place in the animal system. I was further led to suppose, that this wood might contain silica in considerable quantity, as one of its constituent parts, a conjecture which was confirmed by some experiments made by Dr WOLLASTON. Other woods appear also to contain silica, and these, in all probability, will occasionally have portions of their structure highly impregnated with silica, forming masses which will present the principal characters of petrified wood. Indeed, I think it probable, that some of the petrified woods in cabinets, are portions of trees that have been silicified by the living powers of the vegetable, and not trunks or branches which have been petrified or silicified by a mere mineral process.
Having now shewn that opal and hornstone extend in this series of rock-formations, from the primitive to the newest alluvial rocks, and that both appear to be forming in vegetables of particular kinds, we shall next endeavour to shew that the same is probably the case with the diamond. The diamond, as is well known, is carbon in a pure and highly crystallised state,—and although carbon is a very generally distributed substance, it has hitherto occurred but very sparingly in its pure and crystallised state, or in that of the diamond. Primitive rocks, of almost every description, contain carbon,—either in the state of an acid, forming carbonic acid, as in the carbonates of lime and magnesia,—or in the state of an oxide, as in glance or metallic coal,—or in graphite or black lead, which is also an oxide of carbon, but of a different nature from that in glance-coal,—and, from information lately obtained from India, even carbon, in its purest state, in the form of diamond, is said to occur imbedded in a conglomerated quartz, subordinate to clay-slate.
   Greywacke, and other rocks of the transition class, contain graphite and glance-coal, but hitherto have afforded no traces of the diamond. Graphite and glance-coal occur in considerable beds in formations of the secondary class. The diamond, according to different authors, is met with in trap-tuffas, in sandstone, and in amygdaloids of the secondary series. But the geognostical distribution of this gem does not appear to terminate here, for we are assured by those who have attended to its situation in the 
earth that it is found in alluvial beds of clay, not as a secondary deposite, but as an original one; in short, that the diamond continues to form, or to use a more common language, to grow in alluvial districts in India. This opinion-is not improbable, and nothing more seems to be necessary for the formation of the diamond in such situations; than time, and other favourable circumstances, for allowing portions of the carbonaceous matter in the soil to be reduced to the adamantine state, and afterwards to coalesce, according to the laws of affinity, into the granular and crystallised form,—in short, to form diamond. The gradual formation of calcareous grains, crystals and masses of calcareous spar in days, of siliceous compounds in similar rocks, appears to be occasioned by the gradual concentration of the calcareous and siliceous particles by some attractive power, in the same manner as we conceive diamonds may have been formed by the concentration of partides of carbon.
    The preceding details in regard to opal and horn-stone, naturally lead us to inquire, if it is probable that the diamond, like these substances, is occasionally formed by the powers of vegetation? Reasoning a priori, we would say it is much more likely that some plants would produce diamonds, than that they would secrete siliceous matter in a state fit to form opal and hornstone, because diamond is but carbon, the principal constituent part of plants, in a peculiar state; whereas the silica of the opal and hornstone are subordinate ingredients in vegetation. But a direct appeal to the characters of some woods seem to countenance the idea I some years ago suggested in the Sodety, that vegetables may contain carbonaceous matter approaching to the adamantine state. Certain woods which have not the gritty feel of those that contain silica, are uncommonly hard, dark-coloured, and take a high polish; these I conjecture, may be somewhat of an adamantine nature. If this should prove to be the case, it would neither be surprising nor unexpected, that such trees may secrete carbon in the adamantine state, which, on being removed from the influence of the living principle of the plant, would, by the power of affinity, form into true diamonds,— just as the silica secreted from the bamboo takes the form of opal, and that from teakwood the characters of horn- stone.
   The preceding statement, then, seems to give plausibility to the idea, that some sorts of trees may be characterised by the power of forming a mineral matter of the nature of homstone; that others secrete silica, which assumes the character of opal; while others may possess the power of secreting and forming diamonds.
   It may be added, that the carbonate of lime, which occurs in all the rock formations, from the primitive granite to the newest alluvial formation, is one of the mineral substances secreted by vegetables. Some lichens and the chan tribe afford remarkable examples of this fact.

