Many of the more observing and intelligent of the inhabitants of Iceland believe that certain rocks in their country have been formed by deposition from the water of hot-springs. This opinion, which at first sight appears very improbable, was adopted by the travellers Olafsen and Povelsen, who were several years occupied in examining the natural history of that remarkable island, and who describe whole mountains as having been formed by hot-springs. And, very lately, M. Menge, as stated in the last Number of our Journal, returned from Iceland fully convinced, that very extensive formations of thermal rocks extend throughout that extraordinary country. As we consider this fact one of great geological importance, we shall now lay before our readers some account of the observations of Olafsen and Povelsen and Menge, and accompany it with occasional remarks.
In the Borgarfiord district, in southern Iceland, there is a striking and lofty mountain named Baula, of a white colour, and of a rather irregular structure. Nearly the whole mass, from its base to its summit, as determined by numerous natural perpendicular sections, is composed of a rock described by Olafsen and Povelsen under the title, " Saxum tophaceum albidum columnare sive basaltiforme," and which they say is named by the Icelanders Baulastone, because it occurs only or principally in this mountain. It is either massive, or disposed in columns, having three, four, five, six, seven, eight or nine sides, and of a middling degree of hardness. Externally it is pale red; internally it is whitish, and feels dry and sharp, and is lighter than true basalt. It does not effervesce with acids. They further remark, that it resembles other columnar rocks in form, but differs from them in colour, feel and weight; but agrees in so many characters with deposites found around hot-springs, that they consider the whole mountain as a thermal formation, which was at first soft, and in the state of bole, but was afterwards hardened by the influence of internal heat. These travellers found a rock of the same description on the summits of the highest mountains in Iceland, principally in the Westfiorden. A second thermal rock is described under the title, “Saxum concretum tophaceum stratosum, colorepullido,'" and which is named by the Icelanders Hverhella. It is generally of a white colour, is more or less vesicular, sometimes inclines to vitreous, and possesses considerable hardness. It often occurs in large beds, which are either horizontal or irregularly disposed, where hot-springs are in a state of activity, or in places where hot-springs formerly existed, but have long since ceased to play. Connected with both these rocks, there is a vitreous or glassy looking substance, of the nature of obsidian, but very different from the volcanic mineral of that name,—the one being a product of hot-springs, while the other is perfectly melted volcanic glass. A third thermal rock is particularly noticed by Olafsen and Povelsen, under the name "Saxum topJiaceum brunneo-pallidum litlwxylis phytolithisque repletum." It is of a brown colour, vesicular, but not to the same degree as the preceding kind. It contains portions of vegetables more or less completely silicified. It is found in the vicinity of hotsprings, and in many districts where hot-springs were formerly in activity. A fourth thermal rock is named "Saxum tophaceum similiquatum nigricans thermarum.'" This curious rock is of a black colour, and in hand specimens very much resembles earthy slag. It is formed by the hot-springs of Leyraa, and also by the waters of many other hot-springs in Iceland.
Besides these mineral productions of hot-springs, the Danish naturalists enumerate the following, which are of a looser texture. This violet-coloured bole or clay effervesces with acids, and is found in great quantity around active hot-springs, and in extensive districts where such springs formerly existed.  This blue bole contains imbedded crystals and grains of iron-pyrites, occasionally sulphur, and has a sourish taste. Some of the eminences formed of it are still hot, so that if we dig three or four feet deep into the bole, the heat is so great that we cannot hold our hand in it. Whole hills are formed of this bole, which, in such cases, is frequently disposed in strata.
This rock is hard, and sharp to the feel, and has many of the characters of Tripoli. It appears to be a thermal bole or clay, impregnated with silica. The water of hot springs flowing over such a rock, might give rise to veins and masses of pearl-sinter, hyalite, opal and obsidian. Such are the observations of Olafsen and Povelsen, which appear to shew the formation of columnar and massive rocks by hot-springs, and also of obsidian, hyalite, pearl-sinter and opal. Dr Henderson, in his Travels in Iceland, alludes to the formation of rocks by hot-springs; but Sir G. Mackenzie, in his work, does not refer any of the rocks he met with in Southern Iceland to the thermal class. Menge, an active naturalist, was aware of the interesting and important nature of these thermal formations. He observed thermal rocks having many of the characters of basalt, porphyry, wacke, amygdaloid, tuffa and obsidian. These he met with in districts where formerly hotsprings occurred; and observed them still forming around many of the magnificent hot-springs at present in a state of activity. These thermal trap-rocks, viz. basalt, wacke, amygdaloid with calcareous-spar, porphyry, &c. are brought from the interior of the earth, by the water of hot-springs, partly in a state of solution, partly in a state of mud, and are deposited over flat or hilly tracts of country, when they gradually harden, sometimes crystallise, and assume their various permanent characters. The amygdaloidal traps appear to be formed in those cases where carbonate of lime is present; the obsidian where dissolved silica prevails; and in the same general way we might account for the formation of the other rocks. In the collection of Islandic Minerals presented to the Museum of our University by Sir George Mackenzie, there are specimens of a few of these thermal rocks; but the series not being complete, we cannot from it draw up an accurate statement of the characters which they exhibit in hand specimens, far less point out in a satisfactory manner, those general features that characterise them as a member in the grand series of mountain rocks. Menge has promised to transmit a set of these remarkable rocks, which will afford us an opportunity, in some future number of our Journal, to make our readers more particularly acquainted with them. In other parts of the world, where hot-springs have flowed, or still continue in activity, similar formations, we have no doubt, will be met with. The breccias and tuffas in the trachyte district in Hungary, and which contain opal and opalised wood, appear to be formations of hot-springs. Probably even some of the trachytes have been formed in a similar way. The same remark applies to some rocks found in Auvergne. But besides these trap and porphyry rocks, hot-springs also throw out and form rocks of a calcareous nature. The hot-springs of Carlsbad in Bohemia are of this description, and the well known hot-springs of San Filippo in Tuscany, have formed a hill of calcareous tuffa, in many places as compact and hard as limestone. The famous rock named travertino by the Italians, and which abounds in South-western Italy, is a product partly of hot, partly of cold springs. The ancient temples, and the gorgeous palaces and churches of Rome, and indeed the whole of the streets and squares of the former Mistress of the World, are built of concretionary masses which have been deposited by springs. There are many considerable hot-springs around Guancavelica in South America, the waters of which spread over the neighbouring country, and deposit upon it an ash-grey or whitish substance, which acquires a great degree of hardness. The spring-water is so highly impregnated with the earthy matter, that the inhabitants receive it in square boxes or moulds, which it fills in a few days, and the blocks, thus formed, are used for building. Indeed the greater part of Guancavelica, like Rome, is built of the concretionary rock formed from springs. There are on record authentic instances of torrents of hot water flowing from the crater or the sides of volcanoes, when in a state of activity, which, when collected in hollows, or spread over plains, deposites various earthy matters, which at length assume the character of rocks. In the year 1751, a torrent of salt water burst from ^Etna, and continued to flow for a quarter of an hour, and was so considerable that the inhabitants named it NiloTAcqua. Dolomieu and Hamilton observed traces of a frightful torrent of hot water which had issued from the great crater of Mtaa and Spallanzani is of opinion, that part of the tuffas of Italy have been formed by muddy eruptions. In those volcanic mountains whose summits are above the snow line, as is the case in Iceland and in South America, great floods of hot water, charged with earthy matter, burst from the mountains and devastate the surrounding country. Bouguer and Condamine saw dreadful ravages committed by these torrents; and the latter writer informs us, that after an explosion of Cotopaxi, a village situated thirty leagues in a straight line, and probably sixty leagues following the wavings of the ground, was entirely carried away by one of those torrents. These torrents from the ice-caped volcanoes, appear to be entirely external, while those first mentioned seem to come from the interior of the volcanoes.  Masses of siliceous matter, probably the formation of hot-springs, have been found, inclosing foreign bodies of different kinds. Of this description are the masses of siliceous matter inclosing coins, described by authors, and which have been held as fabulous. The following is an instance of this fact. In the year 1812, a mass of flinty matter, twelve inches long, was dug up in France, in the interior of which there were several coins, the most ancient of which were of the sixteenth century. Vegetables are also occasionally found included in a siliceous basis of an opaline or chalcedonic nature, and of these Daubcnton and others have given particular descriptions. In the interior of volcanic mountains, there sometimes occur caverns or hollows partly filled with water, thus forming subterranean lakes. The earthquakes that often agitate these mountains, are occasionally so violent, as to produce great rents, which give free passage to the water of the lakes, which bursts forth with tremendous violence, deluges the neighbouring country, and covers it to a greater or less extent, and with a more or less deep crust of muddy matter. In the earthquake of the year 1746, which overturned Lima, four volcanoes opened at Lucanas and in the mountains of Conception, and occasioned frightful deluges. The volcanoes of the kingdom of Quito sometimes exhibit phenomena of the same kind, but accompanied with circumstances so extraordinary, that we shall now state them. The enormous volcanic cones of Cotopaxi, Pichincha, Tungouragua, &c. in South America, never throw out lava, but frequently ashes, scoriae, and pumice, and sometimes vomit forth immense quantities of water and mud. These eruptions take place more frequently from the sides than from the craters of the volcanoes, and the muddy waters appear to be derived from lakes situated in the interior of the mountains, which burst forth with incredible fury, when any accidental cause, such as an earthquake, splits, and thus opens the side of the mountain. In the year 1698, the mountain of Carguarazo, near to Chimboraco, fell down and covered eight square leagues of country with mud. In the earthquake of the 4th February 1791, 40,000 persons were destroyed by eruptions of water and mud. Muddy waters, resembling those which flow from volcanic mountains, are vomited forth in great quantity, from districts where no volcanic rocks occur, when these are agitated by earthquakes or other causes. In Peru and Quito, the devastations occasioned by volcanoes are not caused by streams of lava, but by water and enormous streams of mud. This substance, which at first has only the consistence of bouilli, but soon hardens on exposure, is named moya. It presents two remarkable phenomena, viz. an intermixture of inflammable matter and of fishes. The inflammable matter is so abundant that the inhabitants of the districts use it in place of fuel. The moya which was thrown out after the terrible earthquake of 1797, and which inundated the country of Pelileo, and destroyed the village of that name, was remarkable for its abundance of inflammable matter. Very often these streams of mud from the interior of the mountains, bring along with them fishes about four inches in length, named by Humboldt Pimolides Cyclopum, and the quantity is sometimes so considerable, that their putrefaction occasions diseases in the country. Humboldt remarks, that they are of the same species as occur in the rivulets of the neighbouring country, and appear to find their way into the subterranean lakes by means of fissures in the rocks. This mud or moya, so remarkably distinguished by its inflammable ingredient and imbedded fishes, is further interesting, by its containing traces-of glassy felspar, and imbedded portions of a fibrous substance somewhat resembling pumice. It is probable that it is an altered porphyry; and we are of opinion, that when completely indurated, it will exhibit characters of the same general nature with those observed in some porphyries, said to be of volcanic and igneous origin.
Rocks formed by Air or Mud Volcanoes. In some countries, jets or great bubbles of water, highly impregnated with mineral matter, are thrown out of the earth by means of gas. The earthy matter is deposited in the state of mud, principally around the mouths of the cones from whence it is expelled; and as these cones somewhat resemble volcanoes in form, they have been named Air-volcanoes. One of the most remarkable of these air-volcanoes hitherto described, is that of Macalouba in Sicily, of which an account has been published by Dolomieu. It consists of a hillock of hardened mud, about one hundred and fifty feet in height. Its superior part forms a plain more than half a mile in circumference, and rising from it are numerous small cones not more than three feet in height, each of which has a crater or hollow filled more or less deeply with a liquid mud, which is in a state of perpetual agitation, owing to the constant passage of great bubbles of air through it. Portions of the mud are constantly thrown out, and thus add to the bulk and height of the cones.
This, volcano is usually in the state we have just described it, but not always, for it is occasionally very much agitated, and exhibits phenomena of a more striking and extensive nature. When this is the case, loud internal noises are heard, and these are accompanied with sharp shocks of earthquakes, which are felt to a distance of two or three miles, and these noises and earthquakes continue more or less for several days, and do not cease until an eruption takes place of an enormous jet of clay, earth, and stones, which are thrown into the air the height of two or three hundred feet. The explosions are repeated two or three times in the space of twenty-four hours. There are years when no eruption takes place. The following is an account o£ one of these eruptions as given by an eye-witness. A dull noise was heard; the earth in the neighbourhood was much agitated, and large rents opened. There arose from the centre of the plain, a bubble of diluted clay, sixty feet in diameter, which gradually increased in magnitude, and attained the enormous elevation of two hundred and thirty feet. This extraordinary and striking spectacle continued for half an hour; was repeated three times, with an interval between each of a quarter of an hour; and, during its continuance, a stormy noise, like that of the sea agitated by a tempest, was heard to proceed from below. The author of this account seized- the first moment to approach the point from whence the explosion proceeded; he plunged his arm into a place where the ebullition was still visible, but did not feel any increase of temperature; on the contrary, the mud felt cold.
There are many small mud-volcanoes in the neighbourhood of Modena, whose height is not more than a few feet. They are named Salses, on account of the saltness of the water they throwout; and which, indeed, is also the case with the water of Macalouba, and of that of most other muddy eruptions observed in different countries. These volcanoes, during their paroxysms, which are attended with slight agitations of the earth, throw out much mud, which extends to the distance of three thousand feet. The gas which occasions the eruptions, is sulphuretted hydrogen mixed with petroleum, and a little carbonic acid. Similar air-volcanoes are described by Pallas as occurring in the Crimea, particularly in the Island of Taman. In the year 1794, one of these burst with a noise like that of thunder, and flame and smoke rushed from it to the height of more than three hundred feet. Great masses of dried mud were projected from it to great distances, and it vomited forth currents of a bituminous mud or slime, to the amount of one hundred thousand cubic fathoms. Humboldt describes air-volcanoes which he saw in the middle of an elevated plain, in the province of Carthagena in South America. There were twenty small cones, having an elevation of from twenty-one to twenty-seven feet in height, and formed of bluish coloured clay. Their summits were hollow or crater-like, filled with water, from the surface of which air arose, and burst with an explosion, and often threw out mud. In the Island of Trinidad, and also in Java, there are considerable air or mud volcanoes.
Rocks formed from Cold-Springs. Many cold or common perennial springs throw out great quantities of earthy matter, principally calcareous, and thus give rise to extensive depositions of calcareous tuffa and sinter. Independent of the thick incrustation formed on the surfaces of craggs and cliffs, and rents of rocks, by the water of such springs, and of which we have a fine example at Starlyburn in Fifeshire, we find that when the water flows into hollows and forms lakes, that then very thick and extensive calcareous formations take place. Thus in Thuringia there are very extensive lake-deposites of calcareous tuffa and sinter. In some districts in that part of Germany, the tuffa rests upon gravel, or on some of the solid strata of the country, and forms beds sometimes fifty feet thick, and which are composed of alternate strata of compact and friable tuffa, with occasional thin beds of bituminous matter. It is in this calcareous formation, that the remains of fossil elephants, rhinoceri, &c. are found in different parts of Germany. It is an important fact, as connected with these fossil animal remains, that the tuffa in which they are envelloped, contains fresh-water shells, analogous to those at present met with in the country where the tuft occurs, but no sea-shells, which proves that these elephants, rhinoceri, &c. could not have been brought from a distance, but must have lived and died in the spot where they are at present found.
Some of the newer secondary rocks may have been formed from the water of cold-springs alone, collected into hollows, and thus forming lakes; or from hot-springs in the same circumstances; or from both conjoined. The newer secondary, more properly tertiary, formations of limestone, marl, opal, quartz, &c. may have been formed in this way.
General Results. From the preceding rapid sketch it appears, 
1. That the water of springs and of volcanoes forms rocks of various descriptions, some of which nearly resemble those of the volcanic class, while others have a strong resemblance to the formations of the secondary class.
2. That as these springs and volcanoes are very generally distributed over the earth, it follows that the rocks above described, may occur in very considerable abundance, and form striking and extensive features in the physiognomy of some tracts of country.
3. That many of these rocks, from their close resemblance to volcanic productions, may have been confounded with them.
4. That the following rocks and simple minerals have been, and are still forming by the agency of springs, and the water of volcanoes.
