SKETCH OF THE COUNTRY NEAR PONDICHERRY.
THE fossiliferous beds which form the subject of the following paper occupy positions at some distance from each other. The first and most interesting of them is situated in the neighbourhood of Pondicherry. The silicified wood, found in the adjacent sandstones, has long been known to the inhabitants of that part of the country, from the fine polish which it admits of and its capability of being formed into ornaments ; but the beds of limestone which have furnished the material for the pavement for the streets of Pondicherry, and which lie within seven miles of the French capital in India, have almost entirely escaped observation.
  Pondicherry itself, as well as Madras, is situated on a very recent formation of loose sand, which extends for a considerable distance along the eastern coast of India, and which in many cases contains marine shells in such abundance that they are dug up and burnt for lime. I have obtained specimens from a spot about thirty miles from Pondicherry and ten from the coast. They are all shells such as now inhabit the Indian seas, and consist of—1. Pyrula vespertilio ; 2. Purpura carinifera; 3. Cardita antiquata ; 4. Pullastra ; 5. an undescribed species of Cytherea ; 1. Arca granosa ; 7. Arca rhombea. This formation is usually bounded by granite, which comes to the surface at Sadras, Madras, and many other places along the coast. Immediately behind the town of Pondicherry, however, the recent beds rest upon some low hills of red sandstone, which encloses an abundance of quartz
pebbles, and occasionally passes into conglomerate, but contains no fossils. Passing these small hills, you come upon the bed of limestone which contains the greater part of the fossils now before the Meeting. At a distance of about four miles due west, you again come upon red sand with quartz pebbles, which here contains a vast quantity of silicified wood; and, at a distance of about sixteen miles from the sea, this is again bounded by hills of black granite.
   It is much to be regretted that the generally undulating surface of the country nowhere affords anything like a section : it is still therefore a desideratum to ascertain the relative position of the limestone and sandstone ; though a variety of circumstances lead to the inference, that the limestone is the more recent of the two. The annexed diagram illustrates the general character of the surface of the country.
   Observing that the pavement of the streets of Pondicherry and the steps of many of the houses were replete with marine shells in a very good state of preservation, I was induced, towards the close of 1840 (although totally unused to geological investigation), to visit the quarries from which the stone was obtained. I found them very near the surface, and not exhibiting any section of the strata; but this visit put me in possession of several characteristic fossils, and led me to repeat the visit at subsequent opportunities ; so that, in the course of the following year, I was enabled to make a very complete collection of the organic remains of the Pondicherry limestone.
   The limestone which contains these fossils does not occupy an area of more than three or four square miles. It forms an undulating plain, and is bounded, both on the east and on the west, by a formation of red sandstone. The country rises gradually towards the west, and it is in this direction that the petrified trees, already alluded to, are found in great numbers. The wood, found in the limestone, is always converted into a calcareous substance; but these trees are silicified; and while the former has in every instance been pierced by the Teredo, and bears other marks of having long been the sport of the waves, the silicified wood is never touched by the worm, nor do the trees bear any other sign of having been water- worn, than that they are always denuded of their branches and roots. Some of these trees are of vast size ; one of them we traced, partly buried in the red sand, to the length of nearly 100 feet. Those which are more completely cleared of the soil bear a perfect resemblance to recent trunks of fallen trees, and are in every respect more perfect and more interesting than the celebrated petrified forest of Cairo, which I have since visited. They are all of them apparently of the same description ; they are coniferous trees, and being grouped together within the space of a few miles, and bearing no appearance of having been long subjected to the action of water, they cannot have been removed to any distance from the spot where they originally grew. They must also have constituted a very different order of vegetation from that which now flourishes on the eastern coast of India. The most common tree now growing in the neighbourhood of these ancient woods is the Tamarind, and from this circumstance and some fancied resemblance in the colouring of the stone, the petrified trees are generally known both to the European and native inhabitants of that part of the coast by the name of Tamarind wood : but their vast straight stems bear no resemblance wdiatever to that tree, and it is easy to suppose that they must have belonged to some gigantic member of the Pine tribe.
   The fossiliferous beds to which I would next call attention are situated in the district of Trichinopoly, and about thirty miles from that town. They are about 100 miles from Pondicherry and sixty miles from the sea: as I have never been able to visit this spot, I regret that I am unable to give any accurate description of these beds ; but I am told that, like the deposit in the neighbourhood of Pondicherry, the Trichinopoly limestone occupies but a small area. I have, however, had several cart-loads of the rock forwarded to me, and believe that I am thus enabled to lay before the Society a complete series of the fossils which it contains. It is a fine dark limestone; and the shells, which are exceedingly numerous, stand out in relief on a weathered surface of the stone, and being perfectly white, they contrast beautifully with the black matrix; but when the stone is fresh broken, the shells not unfrequently retain much of their original colour, and, generally, all their pearly lustre.
   There is still another deposit of fossiliferous limestone to which I beg now to direct attention, forming perhaps a link between the two limestones already noticed. It is situated in the district of Verdachellum in Southern Arcot, about forty miles from the coast and fifty from Pondicherry. Lieut. Newbold, of the Madras Army, remarked, in one of the Madras ‘ Journals of Literature and Science,’ that he thought it highly probable that the fossiliferous limestone of Pondicherry extended into the Verdachellum district. It was owing to this suggestion of Lieut. Newbold that I was induced to make inquiries in that direction. The natives of the country are so little observant of circumstances of this sort, that it was long before I was enabled to obtain any information respecting it. A gentleman resident there forwarded to me, however, a short time before I left India, specimens of a limestone which he had accidentally discovered, containing Pectens, and a few fragments of other shells, which were sufficient to induce me, as soon as possible, to visit that part of the country. Verdachellum is situated on a formation of red sand, containing rounded quartz-pebbles, occasionally passing into conglomerate, precisely resembling the red sand formations near Pondicherry. It contains no marine fossils, but I have obtained one specimen of silicified wood. About six miles from Verdachellum, the valley of the river is formed of an impure limestone, which underlies the red sand and contains marine fossils. It contains no Baculites or Hamites; but there are several varieties of Ammonite, differing from those found near Pondicherry ; and some of these must have attained a very great size. There is also a Nautilus and a Spatangus, both distinct from those found at Pondicherry.
   I will offer only a few general remarks with regard to these deposits. The prevalence of the Baculite, Hamite, Ammonite and Belemnite in the Pondicherry limestone seems clearly to indicate that this formation belongs to the secondary aera, and especially points to the period of the cretaceous beds as the equivalent among European formations. There is among these fossils a single vertebra of a Saurian, which in Professor Owen’s opinion most nearly resembles that of Mosa- saurus. On the other hand, the prevalence of Volutes (of which there are eight species) and the presence of Pyrula, Cypraea, Cerithium and Scalaria, would lead to the conclusion that the period to which they belong is tertiary, and at any rate appear to indicate an unusual mixture of forms. The notion of there being this mixture receives support from a review of the fossils of the other deposits I have mentioned ; for it will be observed that such shells from the Trichinopoly limestone as can be identified with known species, are all tertiary shells of the Paris and London basins, and that most of the others very nearly resemble tertiary shells. One of the Volutes has been decided by Mr. Sowerby to be common to Trichinopoly and Pondicherry : and I obtained, with the tertiary shells from Trichinopoly, a large cast of the chamber of an Ammonite ; and, lastly, several of the shells which at Trichinopoly are associated with tertiary forms, are again found at Verdachellum associated with Ammonites and Pectens.
    


