THIS district has long been celebrated for the beauty and grandeur of its natural scenery. Many descriptions of its interesting features, are in the hands of the public ; and it has furnished a variety of favourite subjects for the pencil. But no proper account of its mineralogy has yet been given. To supply this defect, in some measure, is the object of the following observations, although they are, I fear, but little deserving of the Society’s attention.
   Loch-Lomond stretches nearly in the line of north and south, from its highest point in Glenfalloch, to the village of Luss; opposite to which on the east and south, it expands to a great breadth, and presents those scattered groupes of islands, which render its appearance so extremely beautiful and picturesque. The portion of its neighbourhood which I examined, begins on the east side, about two miles south of Row Ar- dennan, and terminates at the north-west extremity of the base of Ben-Lomond, opposite to Tarbet: On the south side, it reaches from Tarbet to the head of the Leven. In this district, the rocks which occur along the margin of Loch- Lomond on both sides, form a regular and complete series, from the older mica-slate, to the newer species of grey-wacke; including several subordinate beds and minerals, and followed by different sandstone formations, which compose the lower country, on the banks of the Leven, towards Dunbarton.
  Before proceeding to describe the particular localities and relations of these rocks, it is proper to notice, that the general structure of the country in this quarter corresponds to what is found throughout the whole of the Highlands, where mica-slate is the prevailing rock. The mountains and hollows appear to be formed by the irregular effects of decomposition and waste on the mass of alpine strata, which runs in the direction of N. E. and S. W. Thus, at the summit, and along the sides and base of Ben-Lomond, the strata of mica-slate are distinctly observed cropping out in the usual direction, and in a position almost vertical; from which it may be inferred, that they compose the body of the mountain itself. And Loch-Lomond is in fact, a vast hollow scooped out of the same rocks for the strata on the west, are found to be only a continuation of those observed on the opposite side. In like manner, the islands are formed by the same rocks which occur on the mainland, in the general direction already mentioned: so that the whole must have originally constituted one great mass or line of strata, which has been broken or worn into its present shape.
  Ben-Lomond, which, viewed from certain positions, has an uncommonly noble and majestic appearance, rises to the height of 3200 feet. It is composed of mica-slate, passing frequently into talc-slate, and intermixed with vast beds of felspar-porphyry and greenstone, which lie in a position conformable with the strata of the including rock. In this species of mica-slate, there is much quartz ; particularly, towards the summit of the mountain, the rock appears remarkably penetrated and traversed by that substance, in veins and masses of every size and form. Indeed, it is found to be the prevailing ingredient throughput the whole formation, and often gives the mica-slate a whitish colour, resembling at a distance that of pure quartz. I did not, hovvever, observe quartz in regular beds.

   About a mile from Row Ardennan, on the road to the summit, we meet with a rock approaching to greenstone, and containing pyrites. It is disposed in a conformable bed of great thickness, which may be traced penetrating the base to a .considerable distance. Along the ascent, there does not seem to be much variety in the rock. At the summit, it is pure mica-slate, resembling that of Benmore, and assuming the form of a sharp serrated ridge.
   The mountain here, has a great precipice on the N. E. side, with the same indented angular hollow, of which so many examples occur in the Highlands. It is a scene of rude and awful grandeur, in the' fore-ground of what is generally mentioned as the finest prospect in Scotland ; and were it not a subject already exhausted in the pages of travellers and describers, a new visitor, who is lucky enough to reach this interesting elevation under a favourable sky, might still be Jempted to indulge his feelings of admiration and delight, in producing a picture of the numberless beautiful and striking objects which present themselves in every direction. The position, indeed, of so lofty a mountain, on the edge of the Highlands, and skirted by such a magnificent sheet of water, is peculiarly favourable for a commanding find picturesque view both of the alpine and of the low country.

   The N. W. shoulder exhibits quartzy-mica- slate, tending to gneiss, which probably occurs at no great distance in this direction. This species of mica-slate, is unusually undulated, and its structure affects a greater variety of singular and fantastic appearances, than any I have met with. It is also remarkable how much the layers of the stone are affected by the intermixture of pure quartz.
   Examining the base, which is thickly covered with brush-wood and debris, to the north of Row Ardennan, I found two beds of felspar-porphyry ; but the existence of many more is ascertained, from numerous blocks and fragments of that substance, scattered at certain distances along the shore. The mass of this rock is much penetrated with hornblende, chlorite, and crystals of pistacite, generally crossing one another in pairs, like the shape of an X. These last are very numerous even in the smallest detached specimens, and produce an uncommon effect to the eye. There are also vast strata of porphyritic mica- slate, thickly studded with crystals of quartz, particularly one, which may be observed near a cottage on the side of the Loch, about miles N. E, from Row Ardennan. Its structure seems precisely the same with that of an extremely hard and indestructible kind, formerly described, at the side of Loch-Katterin; and it is probably of the same formation, as this substance may be traced for many miles in the general direction of the strata along the intermediate country.
   On the west side of Loch-Lomond, between Tarbet and Luss, mica-slate, talcky, and talc-slate, with beds of greenstone and felspar-porphyry, are found occurring in the same order of relative position, and with the same oryctognostic characters, as the beds and strata already noticed in the structure of the mountain and its base : so that, comparing the distances and positions of the corresponding rocks on each side, in the general line or bearing of the strata, we perceive that they are parts of one formation.
   Southward of Row Ardennan, the mica-slate approaches to, and passes into clay-slate, and also alternates with it. Clay-slate is found in the bed of a stream called Cullimore, which forms the southern extremity of the base of Ben-Lomond. Amongst the rocks in this direction, the most remarkable are two beds of felspar-porphyry, about half a mile from Row Ardennan, which may be traced to a great length, running from the water into the high ground parallel to each other, and separated only by a narrow stratum of mica-slate. This stratum appears to maintain the same breadth, so far as it is possible to follow the rocks; and along with the two beds, by which it is inclosed, lies conformably with the other strata in its vicinity. The porphyry contains crystals of hornblende and pistacite, with small portions of chlorite, and occasionally common garnet and pyrites. It also frequently affects a slaty structure.
   In the same direction, the clay-slate is succeeded and covered by grey-wacke, and grey-wacke with a slaty fracture ; both of a peculiar composition, and probably alternating with the older rocks. This substance is an aggregate of the usual fragments and materials, studded with blue quartz, common quartz, and crystals of felspar. It is found ascending to a considerable height above the level of the water, till it is lost under the heathy ground ; but it re-appears in the bed of the stream above mentioned. I did not find grey- wacke-slate, properly so called. In this portion also, of the formation we are describing, the same predominance of quartzy materials, which was formerly noticed, is still remarkable, not only in veins and separate masses, but pervading the substance of the rocks.
   The islands of Loch-Lomond, are placed in the line of clay-slate and transition-strata ; and com sequently, as already observed, are formed by the more durable varieties of these rocks, which may be traced in continuation, on the opposite shore around Luss. The quarries of Luss and Camstradden, in which the finest clay or roof slate is procured, are well known. They belong to the great formation of clay-slate, which has been traced in so many places, skirting the Highlands from S. W. to N. E.
   Near Rossdoe, we have grey-wacke, and a mineral approaching grey-wacke-slate. These rocks are succeeded, towards Glen-Fruin, by the old red sandstone, in which we observe fragments of guartz, clay-slate; flinty-slate, felspar, &c., and which occurs also intimately mixed with lime, so as to form a species of clay-limestone. It is seen cropping out on the road near Cameron, and continues to the neighbourhood of Dunbarton, where there seems to be a second sandstone formation deeply coloured with iron-ochre. All these successive rocks descend in their level and out-goings, agreeably to the System, till we reach Dunbarton, at which the strata are horizontal, or nearly so.
   In the course of this examination, which has added another example to the many illustrations already existing, of the Wernerian Geognosy, I found no traces of metallic ores, nor was I so fortunate as to discover any imbedded individual, or valuable minerals, worth remarking, so that, to judge from what occurred to my observation, this part of the Highlands is probably more interesting to the admirer of natural scenery, than to the mineralogist.
   I shall now conclude this notice, with a remark or two, suggested by the phenomena of the rocks it describes.

  1. The penetration of the rock by veins and masses of pure quartz, has been remarked. It is well seen in the clay-slate quarries; and it leads to the inquiry, whether the quartz, in the form of nests and small masses, belongs to the original structure of the stone, or is a foreign ingredient subsequently injected in a fluid state, by an external force acting from below. Now, although the whole phenomena may be difficult of explanation on either of these two principles, the one first mentioned appears to me the most natural; because the irregularity in the structure of the stone, which accompanies the occurrence of the quartz, is also to be observed not less frequently, where no separate portions of quartz are to be seen at all. It is a circumstance not a little favourable to this idea, that masses of quartz perfectly isolated may be every where observed, with the layers of the rock in which they are immersed, lapped round them, and obeying exactly the irregularis ties of their various shapes,
  2. The internal structure of the pure mica-slate itself, furnishes another remarkable subject of theoretical discussion. Betwixt the layers, which observe the general direction of the strata, we find others in which the concretions are at different angles to the direction of the including layers, or follow waving irregular lines, in an endless variety of forms. At times, these layers even bend into the contrary direction, and appear inserted concentrically into one another, in a kind of parabolic and conoidal shape. It is self-evident, that such a structure in stratified substances, could not have been the effect of any mechanical pressure or force acting with violence on the great scale, because the bent and straight layer? alternate regularly with one another. Nor will it admit of being explained, by the hypothesis of desiccation after extreme heat. We can ascribe the phenomena in question only to the action of such natural powers, as silently and regularly affect the smaller particles or portions of matter, while assuming new forms of aggregation or minute crystallization, after having been deposited from a solvent. Other appearances of undulation in the layers, are manifestly those which would be produced in the course of deposition from a fluid affected by currents, or in a state of agitation, sometimes gentler, and at others more violent, as may be seen in the perpendicular section of any common sand-bank.
  However, therefore, the question respecting the vertical position of the strata may be decided, the difficulty of accounting for the internal structure of the stone will still remain in all its force, and is equally great, whether the strata were formed originally in a horizontal position, or inclined as we actually see them. For, if horizontal, then we are sensible, by a simple inspection of th6 figures, that the minuter concretions must have been formed in an inclined, or even, in many cases, a vertical position, and frequently also in a bent or waved line.
    From these remarks, it Would appear to be not improbable, that further discoveries may afterwards shew us, that other powers, in addition to those of gravity, or even chemical attraction, have been concerned in producing the appearances now presented. Is it not possible, that magnetism and electricity, lodged in the great central masses of the globe, may have performed a more important part, in affecting the arrangement of the mate. rials deposited in the form of strata, than we are yet fully prepared to allow ? And may not the action of a magnet on iron-filings, when a sheet of paper is interposed, as well as many phenomena of chemical and electrical attraction, convey some idea of what may have taken place at the period of such deposition ?
  If action of this kind might be admitted on the small scale, no difficulty would remain, in conceiving that nature on the great scale might have formed strata, as we now see them, under any angle of inclination to the horizon, more especially when modified by the form of the nucleus or substratum on which the deposition may be supposed to have taken place. In like manner, with regard to the size or mass of the strata, it is plain, that if a layer of only a few lines thickness could be formed by the agents now supposed acting in directions different from, or opposite to, that of gravity, and thus modifying the effects of that power,—layers or strata, of any magnitude observable in nature, might have been formed in the same way. And unless this hypothesis be admitted, the appearances which have been described, must remain for ever inexplicable.
   On the whole, the phenomena exhibited in the actual position, and internal structure, of the mica-slate of Ben-Lomond, may be quoted as an authentic and demonstrative record, attesting the reality of operations and events that have taken place at some former period in natuTe, by powers or causes, of which the action has not hitherto been recognized in our geological speculations.


