Introduction.-The philosophy of zoology can be based only on anatomy. Men, it is true, of vast genius had attempted, and with some success, to formule the laws regulating or presiding over the formation of animal bodies-the laws, in fact, regulating animal forms-by a bold synthesis, independent of all analysis. Such were the attempts of Aristotle, and of Newton. Buffon, availing himself, no doubt, to a certain extent of the labours of Daubenton and others, but more especially influenced by the comprehensive views which a deep and constant meditation of Nature taught him to adopt, made an effort in in the same direction, sufficiently powerful to attract the attention of the Sorbonne and the Vatican. But so long as the philosophy these great men taught or proposed was without a basis in anatomical research, so long was it entitled only to the name of "hypothesis," unsupported by proof, by an appeal to intuitive evidence, or by any analysis of the material composing the essence of animal forms. Their views, then, were, by all inquirers into truth, regarded-and this, in the nature of things, could not well be otherwise-merely in the light of ingenious hypotheses, grouping together phenomena of which the greater part were avowedly mysterious and inexplicable. So long as the laws of zoology were confined to, and embraced within, the doctrine of final causes, all philosophic minds were of course sensible that the philosophy of natural history, including, of course, zoology, could have no existence; for these doctrines placed it of necessity within that ultimate appeal, the First Cause, where all science ceases. The principle, or rather the phenomena, of life, so mysterious in their nature, so difficult to investigate, led no doubt to this view-to this ultimate appeal. It was in vain that gifted men, as Fontana and others, mathematicians and geometricians, pointed out that final causes were not causes, but effects; the doctrine maintained its ground, and does so still. The successive philosophies of the day, as they were called-the theological. namely, and the metaphysical-gave the doctrine sufficient support to overrule the natural philosopher, and to remove the phenomena of life, at least, from his field of inquiry. The reason was this: the field of inquiry included MAN, whose obvious connexion with the zoological world could not be mistaken, could not be denied. But man’s history had been made the subject of elaborate works by historical and theologico-historical writers ; the animal and vegetable worlds had been described as subservient to him; whatever trenched on histories which, taken literally, are clearly and simply fabulous, gave alarm to powerful classes of men, deeply and intensely interested in obstructing all inquiry into truth, and Goethe, Oken, and Geoffroy St. Hilaire would have shared the fate of Galileo, but for the accidentally altered circumstances of the European world. The French revolution had occurred-that mightiest of all human events. The artificial bonds of society were loosened. Men for the first time ventured to think. The mass of mankind rose incredibly in intellectual calibre for a short space; it attempted to soar with science into the loftier, purer, and calmer atmosphere of the thinking world; its natural grossness brought it rapidly to the earth, where it now lies, a prey to every imposture, the struggle serving only to rivet each chain more securely than before. In the struggle, science escaped, not unobserved by the natural enemies of truth, repudiating alike the deceiver and the deceived. But great as was the genius of Goethe, Oken, and Geoffroy, it would have proved unavailing to stem, even for an instant, the vast turbid current of folly and fable which passed even to later times for a history of this globe and its living inhabitants, but for the accidental appearance of one man, who unconsciously submitted to thinking men, not a hypothesis, not a theory, but a demonstration, irrefutable as those of Euclida demonstration of the fact, that all previous histories of the globe and its living inhabitants were simply fables. That man was George Cuvier, an anatomist. Palissy, it is true, had attempted this demonstration long before, but Palissy was a potter, not an anatomist. Buffon threw out a bold conjecture, and was instantly silenced by the Church of Rome. Cuvier’s demonstration could not be so disposed of; it admitted of no refutation. The most subtle Jesuit, ever ready with a refutation even of Newton, quailed before the organic remains, attesting the existence of a former world, of a vast, if not of an infinite, antiquity. It is worthy of remark, that Goethe, Oken, Geoffroy, and Cuvier, however much they might differ on some points, agreed in this : that the basis of Philosophic Zoology was to be sought for in Anatomy. Goethe saw this at once, even when a mere student ; so did Oken, Cuvier, and Geoffroy. Comparative anatomy was the starting-point of all, but from this their course was different, divergent ; Goethe, by the transcendant force of his genius, was straightforward, cautious, and philosophical; Oken, theoretical, transcendental, and mythical; Geoffroy halted between the systems; Cuvier refusing the aid of embryology, preferred a perpetual recurrence to the miraculous interposition of supreme power-a frank confession that with him science and philosophy no longer guided his pen. The discovery of the signification of the fossil remains (ossemens fossiles) led Cuvier to the conclusion, startling to the thinking mind, the philosophic,-namely, that there had been three or four successive creations of the animal and vegetable worlds. As he grew older, and his intellect stronger, he himself felt the antagonism existing in such a view to sound philosophy, and he committed to paper a direct contradiction to those who had ascribed such an opinion to him. But still later he returned somewhat to his original views-the views of his early years. Goethe, Oken, Geoffroy, never changed ; as at first, so at last : one creation was their motto ; unity of organization ; unity of type ; unity of plan, was their theory. Not so expressed it is true, and variously modified by each, but still based on one great idea. Unity of plan, unity of design, observable, traceable, demonstrable, in all forms which live, which have lived, or which may hereafter come into being. I commenced these inquiries in 1810, and since that moment have never lost sight of them. My first endeavour was to reduce the structure of the fore-foot of the horse to the corresponding parts in man; to compare and to discover the corresponding structures. I felt sure that they must have been formed on one plan; it was a deep conviction, arrived at by no reasoning-instinctive. As might be supposed, my success at that time was not great. The rudimentary fingers in the horse surprised me. Why rudimentary fingers? I said to myself. I fancied that all Nature’s works were perfect. The theory of arrested development, at which Meckel and the German school caught so strongly, did not satisfy me, and never did, even when forced to teach it for want of a higher generalization. It is a doctrine I am now prepared to refute. The laws of deformation are as regular as the laws of formation. My next effort (1812) was to compare the organs of sight in man with the same in all other animals. Other structures followed, in all the natural families from man downwards. Satisfied, by a constant appeal to structure, that one great plan regulated all-that there could not be two or more plans- two or more creations-I had not yet seen any of the founders of the philosophy of zoology. This happened in 1821. Acquainted with what I had done for comparative anatomy, no introduction was required to those whom I most desired to see-Cuvier, Geoffroy, and De Blainville : Goethe and Oken were in Germany, and thus I never met the real founders of all philosophical anatomy. But my own dissections furnished me with data sufficient to prevent me coinciding with Geoffroy in his views of unity of the organization; whilst deep instinct, which never errs, told me that of the four creations maintained by Cuvier, three at least must be superfluous; to the geometrician I leave the refutation of the one creation, intending not to meddle with that which seems beyond the reach of human thought. My object in this free inquiry is merely to ascertain, if possible, if there really be a philosophy in zoology-if its basis can be shown to rest on science-if zoological knowledge forms a part of science, or merely an amusing mode of contrasting the human with the non-human. As I view it, a history of zoology requires for its basis an inquiry into- 1. The laws of species and of natural families. Do species and natural families exist, or are these distinctions merely human contrivances resulting from imperfect observation ? Is mankind composed of one great natural family, or of several ? and if of one, how many species, as permanent varieties are called, enter into its composition ? Are species and natural families permanent and eternal, or is it merely a question of time ? What part do embryonic forms play in Nature’s grand scheme ? Do they merely shadow forth a unity of plan, or do they, rather, portray the endless varieties of forms which animal matter may in time and space assume ? In this view, the embryo is the most perfect of forms, embracing within it the possible of the past, the present, and the future. Individual adult forms simply show the development of that which can exist in unison with the existing order of things. The modern rhinoceros and elephant, tapir and sloth, are simply the developed forms of a natural family which once existed under other forms. They are not the mere hereditary descendants of the fossil world, as Geoffroy thought, but forms new in space and in time, but pre-existing in every embryo of their natural families. The embryo, then, is that which Nature perfects, that to which she looks for the continuation of va1’ied life as it exists and has existed on the globe. The future is wrapt up in the same category. The embryo of any species of any natural family contains within it during its phases of development, all the forms or species which that natural family can assume or has assumed in past time. In the embryo and the young individual of any species of the natural family of the Salmonidæ, for example, you will find the characteristics of the adult of all the species. The same, I believe, holds in man; so that, were all the existing species of any family to be accidentally destroyed, saving one, in the embryos and young of that one will be found the elements of all the species ready to reappear to people the waters and the earth, the forms they are to assume being dependent on, therefore determined by, the existing order of things. With another order will arise a new series of species, also foreseen and provided for in the existing world. There can be no such thing as arrested development, nor a gradual development of all forms towards perfection. Nature’s works are perfect, first and last; and the hypothesis which supports the idea of a development tending to perfection is simply another expression of the doctrine of a final cause. The so-called "arrest of development" in the individual is a doctrine admitting of the easiest refutation. Development can only mean development, and nothing else. This may be either individually and specifically progressive, or zoologically retrogressive-i. e., back towards other forms; but always development, notwithstanding-a retrogressive development. The laws of deformation are as constant and regular as the laws of formation, which we call perfect, as belonging to the existing world; this is all. But to enter on this inquiry, a preliminary investigation is necessary. Zoological forms either obey general laws or they do not; they have been formed on one great plan, or on several plans. If the latter be maintained, it ought to be shown in what the plans differ; if the former, the scheme or plan ought to be explained and its existence demonstrated, if possible. If no such plan exist, there exist no laws, which, indeed, in that case, are not required, the scientific basis on which zoology rests being removed, it would cease to be a science. Whether life was coeval with the globe or not, is a question not essential to the present inquiry. At its appear- ance it of necessity obeyed those laws which philosophy is called on to investigate. In their essence these laws can never alter: this is what science teaches. No fossil remains have ever been discovered contradictory of the theory that one great scheme or plan has at all times existed. In a strictly philo- sophical sense, there could be only one creation; but the real difficulty is to determine what were the zoological forms of that creation. Were they species-that is, races, or did the individuals represent natural families embracing many species ? ’! However this may be, one thing is certain: many races or species have ceased to be, whilst others, which were not then, now live. These are new species merely as regards man, for, in point of fact, distinct species exist not in Nature. They are not included in the great scheme which fills up all voids, all differences, all distinctions. The gap-absence of the link connecting one species, as we call them, with another-man assumes as a positive fact in Nature-an intentional part of her plan; but it is not so, as science will soon demonstrate. Some persons have troubled themselves with a refutation of the hypothesis of the convertibility of one species into another. It is wholly a labour of supererogation, for no strictly scientific man ever entertained such an hypothesis in the sense assumed by them. . My first step, then, is to establish the doctrine of one great plan or type for all animals; a unity of plan-that is, a type- a type " which exists everywhere, but is nowhere to be found." A material archetype is the invention of a mind sunk in materiality and in error. No such can exist, since a part can never represent a whole.
A type being proved to exist, there arises next the question of varieties in zoological forms, embraced within the type. The application of these two inquiries includes all natural history as a science; if applicable to one they are applicable to all forms, man included. The law called " the arrest of development hypothesis" explains nothing, and involves increasing contradictions in terms. For many years I have preferred using the terms " persistence of embryonic forms," although this phrase also is open to manifest objections. The persistence of the webbing of the human fingers to the adult state has been described as " an arrest of development." I should have thought it rather " a retrogressive development" towards another form. Is the presence of a third and a fourth head of the biceps muscle in man an arrest of development" ? Is the presence of a supra-condyloid process in the humerus and the passage of the humeral artery and median nerve through the passage thus formed an arrested development ? Is it even a persistence of embryonic forms? These doctrines are nearly the reverse of those I hold. In the embryo I see a perfect, not an imperfect being; its developments, transmutations, metamorphoses, follow certain laws; they equally tend to perfection of the individual species as a species, of the individual as an individual. But their developments must not be called imperfect, inferior, or arrested developments, merely because they happen to tend towards, and to produce, inferior forms of organization, as we esteem them. The brain of the human embryo, like all its other structures, no matter to what species it belongs, embraces every possible form which man assumes, or has assumed, on the earth. The white races are not the more fully developed, and the negro the more imperfectly developed, species of one common natural family. The development of each is perfect in its way-equally so. The negro brain is not an imperfectly developed white brain, but a specifically formed brain, developed according to its own specific laws. When in the white races we find developments resembling the negro, and vice versa, these are not arrested developments, but retrogressive, if you will, yet perfect in their kind, To instance a class of animals, supposed, erroneously, however, to be less complex in their organization than man, lower in the scale, less perfect-the class Fishes; and selecting amongst these, as, perhaps, most familiar to my readers, the natural family Salmonidæ,—if in this natural family, divisible into three sub-families, I find the young of any of the species of any of the sub-families strictly to resemble each other, and yet the grown individual of any of the species materially to differ from any other, it by no means follows that the one is a species less developed than another. In the embryo-in the young-all are alike; each offers in itself the specific characters found in all. The embryo salmon, for example, is of no species; it is of all. Take from it one set of characters, it becomes the salmon; deduct another, you have the forelle; subtract a third, you have the trout. In every embryo, of every species, we have the possible of all forms appertaining to that natural family at least. The destruction, then, by geological or other phenomena, of all the species, saving one, of any natural family, would not necessarily extinguish that family, since, in the embryo of the remaining species, there exist the elements for the reappearance, perhaps under modified forms, of all the extinct species. As of fishes, so of man: one natural family one embryonic form, equal to the production of all species in accordance with the essential conditions of existence in time and space.


