THE tract of country to be here described, is at present denominated the Campsie Hills, and was formerly called Lennox. It is almost entirely situated in Stirlingshire, and forms the southern district of that county. In the west, it commences between the town of Dunbarton and the village of Drymen, and stretches from thence towards the east and north-east; in which direction, it is about twenty-two miles in length, but in its breadth it is variable. About the centre of the district, it is nearly ten miles broad, and this breadth diminishes towards its western and eastern extremities. It is bounded upon the south by Dunbartonshire ; and, on the north, by a lowly undulated tract of ground, stretching from the village of Drymen to the town of Stirling, which tract forms the southern part of the river district of the Forth.
   The general surface of the Campsie district, may, in the strictest language, be denominated highly undulated. Its surface majestically portrays the Bay of Biscay after a western gale, and its high undulations follow each other in regular succession. These undulations are of great length from south to north, and, nearly in that direction, the most of them stretch from side to side of the district. The general contour of these lengthened hills, individually, is somewhat uncommon, although not peculiar to that part of the country. Tach hill has a considerable degree of curvature, the convex side of which, is uniformly presented to the west: the central part of that curve, forms the highest point of their elevation, and they gradually slope towards the extremities of the segments which their curvatures form. Upon their eastern sides, they rise with an equal acclivity of from twenty to thirty degrees; the rapidity of which, in some degree, diminishes as it approaches the summits, where they are somewhat round- backed. Their central or highest points seldom or ever exceed an elevation of from twelve to fifteen hundred feet above the level of the sea ; at which height, their western faces very generally become abrupt and broken, and continue to be precipitous for a considerable depth under the lip of the hill; but these broken and abrupt faces seldom «hew more of the stratification than that of the trap, which in such situations evidently points out its strong tendency towards columnar form. At the bases of these precipices, a long and rapid slope of debris succeeds, which are frequently covered by vegetation. The troughs or hollows between the undulations, generally form narrow dales or glens, but some few of them have a sufficient breadth to entitle them to the denomination of valleys. The most extended of these, are the vales of Campsie, and of Fintry.
   Such is the general contour or outline of the surface of this district, with only one or two exceptions ; the most prominent of which, is a hill of somewhat conic appearance, called Meikle Ben. This hill is situated a little to the south of the road which leads from Fintry to the vale of Campsie. It towers above all the other heights of the district, and rises superior to them at least 300 feet. As far as the interior of this hill car* be examined, it is found to be composed of the same species of trap which is so generally the incumbent stratum of the Campsie district. From the base of this hill, issue the rivers of Carron, and of Endrick; the first of these takes an eastern direction, and empties itself into the Frith of Forth ; the second takes a western direction, and flows into Lochlomond, This circumstance of the two rivers rising nearly at the same point, and immediately flowing in directions diametrically opposite to each other, sufficiently ascertains that this hill of Meikle Ben forms the saddle of this part of the country.
   I shall now proceed to describe the interior structure and composition of this hilly district.
   As far as this tract of country has been dipped into, the geological materials of which it is formed are as follow : A surface of vegetable soil,—trap,— sandstone,—limestone,—shale or slate-clay,—blue clays of various tints and of various consistences,— bituminous shales,—clay iron-ores, some of which are thinly stratified, and others are imbedded in the shale in lenticular forms,—coal,—and clay-marl ; all of which materials, have been arranged by nature in the order in which they are here placed, from the surface-soil downwards.
   The vegetable surface-soil of this district, is but thinly scattered over the face of its hills : it consists mostly of an argillaceous matter of a light brown colour, much mixed with the small debris of the trap on which it generally rests, and from the decomposition of which it has evidently originated. The quantity of iron in this soil is considerable, and it owes its colour to an oxide of that metal.
   The rock which occurs immediately under the surface-soil, is trap, which generally, in this district, is of great thickness, and, in the broken western faces of the hills, it frequently shews this thickness in sections of from 70 to 100 feet, perfectly perpendicular to the horizon. These faces almost always display an arrangement of polygonal columnar forms, which generally rest upon sandstone : But, in some instances, I have observed this great body of trap divided into two beds of nearly equal thickness, the upper bed shewing distinctly its strong tendency towards taking columnar form ; but the underground, upon which these columns stand, being perfectly amorphous, and shewing no tendency to any form whatever. The columnar forms of the trap in the upper bed, although clearly apparent, are very irregular in their constructions, as to size, sides, and angles; no symmetrical similitude is to be observed among them. They have in general from three to six sides, and are of various diameters, from one to seven feet. Their heights, at Murray’s Hall, may be traced, in the front of the precipice, from seventy to eighty feet, and their positions are in general vertical. Some of these columns appear to be jointed, but these apparent joints have no regularity in position or direction ; and these appearances seem only produced by accidental cracks which cross some of the columns. The amorphous part of the trap, which sometimes is interposed between the columnar trap and the sandstone, is of the same composition as the upper bed, but their component parts differ in their proportional quantities; that is to say, that the underbed contains a much greater proportion of iron than the upper does, and their quantities of hornblende and felspar also vary. When both of those beds are equally exposed to the external air, the under one is seen to be much more under the influence of decomposition than the upper one.
   This rock is the Floetz-Trap of Werner; its composition consists of hornblende, compact felspar, a few scales of mica, some minute portions of iron-pyrites, with an admixture of ferruginous particles, which, in the columnar part of the rock, seem to be but slightly oxidised.
   The sandstone of this district forms a very general part of its geological composition. The small quantity of cement, which is one of its component parts, and is the cause of the cohesion among its particles, is a white clay, which entitles it to the denomination of an Argillaceous sandstone. The thickness of the various beds of this rock here, is very unequal, and the layers of its strata are from three to eight feet thick. The upper stratum of this sandstone, upon which the trap rests, is generally of a whitish-grey colour ; but, in passing downwards, it becomes in colour a whitish-yellow, which at last tints down to a yellowish-brown, from a slight admixture of iron in its cement. Its granulations of quartz are small, and its texture is rather compact; but the adhesion among its particles, is in general by no means strong.

  Limestone also forms here a very general part of geological composition : it is found in almost every part of this district, and occurs in separate beds, which are, as to depth, considerably removed from each other. In the eastern part of the district this limestone is found in two separate beds; the upper one of which varies in thickness from two to four feet, and is one hundred and seven feet under the surface. The second bed has generally a thickness of six feet, and is one hundred and twenty-five feet under the surface. This last bed is in many places extensively wrought by mining; it produces lime of an excellent quality. The limestones of these two beds, are both of a dark bluish-grey colour; they are of a glimmering lustre, and are opake. Their fractures are small splintery, and are somewhat brittle; they are nearly semihard inclining towards soft. Small portions of iron-pyrites and minute petrifactions of entrochi, are imbedded and thinly scattered in their masses. Both of these beds are much intersected by narrow veins of bluish-white calcareous spar.	.
  The clays of this district are generally of a dark blue colour, and remarkably tenacious. The shales or slaty-clays are from a dark blue colour to almost that of black ; in some places, this shale admits into its composition a small proportion of bitumen and particles of coal-glance. They are of various indurations from very soft to hard. The intervening strata between the two beds of limestone consist of sandstone, clay, shale, &c.; for the natural position of all of which, see the list of strata and the section.
  Iron-ore is plentifully produced in many parts of this district, and it consists of two kinds. The first is found in thin strata, the beds of which are from four to fourteen inches thick ; and these beds are separated from each other by layers of blue clay strongly tenacious. The second kind is the lenticular shaped or ball-formed iron-ore, which is found imbedded in blue clay, and also in shale, generally in the near vicinity of coal. Upon the southern confines of this district, in the parish and vale of Kilsyth, I examined with much attention one of the mines which is remarkably productive of this lenticular formed ore. I there found the balls imbedded in a soft shale, and regularly arranged in strata ; they rest upon one of their flattened sides, and their distribution is nearly lineal; but in these lines, they are seldom imbedded so near to each other as to come in contact. The balls of each line were generally of the same size. In the deepest strata, the largest balls are found, and the smaller-sized ones are found in higher strata. The largest which I measured, somewhat exceeded a foot in diameter, and they diminish from this size down to a quarter of an inch.
  The interior arrangement of these lenticular forms, is so well known, that no description is here necessary; they have, however, afforded a field for considerable discussion, and proofs to aid theory have been endeavoured to be drawn from- their-interior appearances. The metal produced from this lenticular ore, is far superior, both in quantity and in quality, to that which is extracted from the ore that is found thinly stratified.
  Coal is very generally found around the whole1 of the border of this district, excepting upon its northern side ; and I have little doubt, but that the whole of the Campsie Hills are incumbent upon a coal-field. This, however, remains to be proved, as no coal has as yet been attempted to be found in the central part of the district, where the vast thickness of the trap stratum proves a bar to making trials of that kind at a moderate expence. Towards the western border, in the parish of Campsie, and at the eastern extremity of the district, in the parish of Larbert, coal has been long and extensively wrought. Coal has also been long wrought upon its southern basis, where its hills dip into the vale of Kilsyth. The beds and seams of coal that have been already wrought, are of various thicknesses in various situations; but none of them exceed four feet. Their depth under the surface-soil, varies from seven to twenty- two fathoms. This coal is by no means of the best quality : it is very generally found to contain a considerable quantity of sulphur, and its bituminous ingredient is far from being ample. In burning, it emits a disagreeable smell, and leaves a very large proportion of ashes. 

   Its roof, or immediate covering in the stratification, and its floor, or what it rests upon, consist both of clay, with which the coal is much mixed, and of course much contaminated.
   The general dip of the whole of the strata in the Campsie Hills district, is to the south-east, varying in different places from an angle of sixteen, to one of thirty degrees.
   The following is a Table of the Strata as they occur in the eastern part of the district at Murray’s Hall, where the trap displays a perpendicular face, of from seventy to eighty feet; and a Table of the Strata near its western extremity, in the vicinity of the village of Campsie, where the coal is found in its greatest thickness.

   In the above section at Murray’s Hall, the Coal has not yet been found, and by the other taken near to the village of Campsie, the trap does not exist; but this last-mentioned section was taken in one of the vales, in which situations, the trap sometimes disappears, and these disappearances seem, in a great measure, to have been effected by the attrition of rock masses, set in motion by heavy and rapid currents of water.
   In all situations of this district, where the trap has disappeared, the vegetable or surface soil rests upon a strongly tenacious blue clay, much mixed with water-worn stones, and this blue clay rests upon sandstone. Among the water-worn stones imbedded in the clay, I seldom found specimens of the native rocks of the district; those which I examined, consisted mostly of rocks generally deemed of the oldest formations, such as quartz, porphyries, granites, &c. ; the native beds of which, are far distant to the north and west of that part of the country. 
   I have here mentioned above, that the disappearance of the trap in some of the glens and narrow vales, seems to have been produced by the effects of the attrition of heavy bodies set in motion by a great force of water in rapid movement. But this hypothesis requires explanation, and an exposition of the phenomena upon which it rests. These, I shall here endeavour to describe, as they appeared in some parts of this district.

   In some of the glenS and narrow vales, where the trap had not entirely disappeared, I perceived upon its surface strong indications and marks of attrition. In some places the surface of the trap was smooth, and had evidently received a considerable degree of polish ; and this polish is almost always seen marked by long lineal scratches. In other places, there appeared narrow grooves, apparently formed by the rapid movement of large masses of rock having been swept along its surface; and I remarked, that these striae or scratches, were very generally, in a direction from west to east, excepting where inequalities of the surface, and sudden turns in vales had partially influenced the course of the current. In the eastern part of the district, there occurs a small elevated plain slightly undulated. Here the surface of the trap, in some places, had lost its covering of soil, and was left bare for inspection. Upon this plain, I again detected some of these scratches, which were,- in this situation, generally in a direction from west to east, sometimes deviating a little towards the southwest and north-east, and sometimes towards the north-west and south-east; but in taking the average or medium of these directions, their general and true course seemed to me to be from west to east. Upon the surface there were scattered immense masses of the trap, which, from their apparent weight, seemed perfectly capable of forming these scratches and grooves above described, had they been put in motion and impelled along the surface. Upon examining some of these huge masses, I found their surfaces scratched and worn in such a way as to prove sufficiently indicative to me, that they had been long subjected to attrition in water; and I also observed, that many of them presented their principal or most projecting angle towards the west, and sometimes towards the north-west, which, according to my opinion, strongly implies the direction of the current which left them in the position in which they now rest. It is not the object of this paper to dip into the causes of this phenomenon ; but that such currents as were capable of the effects which I have endeavoured to describe, have flowed over the surface of our globe, is to me, clearly evident, and these scratches and grooves here mentioned, are some of the minor, but clear proofs of its action. To examine upon the great and true scale the proofs of these currents having existed, we must, in Scotland, enter among the Grampians ; and we will there see, that the mountains of that range very generally present their most bluff and abrupt sides towards the west, and the north-west points, and tail and taper away towards the east and south-east.
The above observations relative to this subject, Hlay to some appear trivial and unimportant; but I have here given them, as they relate to a phenomenon, which, I think, merits some attention, especially when the various changes that have taken place upon the crust of opr globe, are taken into consideration.
   By the description here given of the general stratification of the Campsie Hills district, it will be perceived, that it presents nothing peculiar or very remarkable among its various strata, and is in a great degree similar in its formation to most of the coal-fields in Scotland. I may, however, perhaps be here permitted to except one dissimilarity,—which is the immense bed of trap that is so generally the superincumbent stratum of this portion of the country. From the general configuration of this trap into columnar forms, it will be deemed by some geologists to be of volcanic origin, or that these forms have been produced by the effects of internal heat. In consequence of the writer of this memoir having examined much of Mount Etna from base to summit, and having been frequently upon Vesuvius, as also having visited some of the Lipari Islands, he may perhaps be allowed to have gained some knowledge regarding the apparent effects of heat upon fossil bodies ; and, assuming upon this knowledge gained by his frequent visits to volcanic regions, he proposes to venture here some opinions upon this controverted subject; and, in doing so, he must commence by gating, that, in the district above described, he could perceive no effects either as to matter or form, that might not have been produced by atmospheric action alone ; nor could he perceive any, appearances in the various strata that occur under the trap, that indicated in any degree, interior heat having ever acted upon them. It is well known, that with regard to geology, there are two systems very different from each other, and by the tenets of these systems, they are widely separated. The adopters of these systems are in general keenly bent towards their support, and fiercely argue upon the propriety of their different creeds.
   One class of those philosophers, hold, that the polygonal forms which have been here described as belonging to the Campsie Hills district, are of aqueous origin; and some of this class, even go so far as to say, that the columnar forms found so frequently in the vicinity of volcanic regions, have not assumed that form in consequence of volcanic fire, but that such columns have been only detached from their interior native rocks by the violence of volcanic shocks, and have been ejected in their native state unchanged by vulcanic fire. 
   The other class of philosophers, hold these forms to have been produced by the agency of vulcanic fire, or from internal heat proceeding from some other cause. This last-mentioned class, do not, however, (as is generally thought,) hold all the formations of the crust of our globe, of which we can claim acquaintance, to be of igneous origin : they admit clearly that some of the strata have been formed by a deposition from water ; but for the consolidation of these strata so formed, they think it necessary to call in the aid of internal heat, and hold these polygonal forms to have been produced in consequence of its effects. Such, upon this point, is nearly the general outline of the difference of opinion subsisting between these two parties. But it ought to be remembered, that nature frequently produces the same effects by very different means, and that the columnar configurations are formed not only in the moist but also in the dry way ; which can be here easily exemplified. The aqueous origin of these forms, may be observed upon any extended surface of clay or of mud, which has been the deposite of water, and where evaporation has taken - place. In such situations, when evaporation has taken place to a considerable degree of dryness, the deposited soil gradually shrinks, cracks in various directions, and takes polygonal forms. If the soil in such situations is shallow, the tabular form is exhibited ; but if the soil is of any considerable thickness, the columnar form appears. Beautiful displays of these forms on a small scale, may frequently be seen in the operation of starch-drying, and in some of the preparations for pottery.
  Upon the large scale, this operation of nature is to be seen to the greatest advantage in warm climates, where evaporation is strong and rapid ; one example of which, I shall here beg leave to describe, it having struck me as being a remarkably good and explanatory specimen of this phenomenon. The notes which I took upon the spot where this specimen occurred, are now before me.
  In the Mediterranean, on the coast of Africa, this example fell under my observation some years ago. In the near vicinity of a considerable rivulet, deeply imbedded in a soft soil, there had existed a piece of water of considerable expanse, on a level of about twenty feet above the stream of this rivulet; one of the windings of this stream had undermined, and had carried off a great part of a rising ground that had served to imbank upon one side this former lake ; which bank, when broken down, had given drainage to it, and had laid open its deposited soil to a considerable depth. Upon this broken down side, the soil of the former lake displayed a beautiful arrangement of columnar forms. These were in length about eighteen feet, and were from a foot and a half to three feet in diameter, but, as to their magnitudes and forms, they varied much from each other; although, however, there was no very striking similarity to be observed among them, they were all angular, and their forms generally consisted of four, five, and six sides. They were perfectly vertical in position, and their forms were to be traced nearly down to the stream which had invaded their situation. Upon examining the surface which the lake had formerly covered, I found it perfectly level, and divided into polygonal forms by fissures and cracks, stretching out in all directions, which, by intersection, formed the columns here described ; on the tops of which, I stepped from column to column, as upon a Giant’s Causeway. Some of the cracks and fissures had been here filled up with dust of a blackish-brown colour, which gave some parts of this surface the appearance of mosaic work. The majority of the tops of the columns were certainly very irregular as to form, yet there were some among them that could be perceived approaching very nearly to regularity in sides and angles: two of these particularly attracted my attention, and which I found almost bore the test of measurement. These two were pentagons; the one was two feet, and the other a foot and a half , in diameter. The muddy clay of which the whole of these columns were composed, was almost of an impalpable grain, and was of a reddish-brown colour ; it had gained a considerable induration in the mass, but could be easily scratched by the nail. This example is drawn from classic ground: I discovered it in the vicinity of ancient Carthage, where debris now only mark the former site of that great and important city.
   Those geologists, who, upon the other hand, assert, that columnar forms are not produced by volcanic operation, must surely have never visited a Veal volcanic region. Proofs of this form having taken place in consequence of volcanic agency, are to be seen around the sites of almost every volcano where lava has been erupted. I shall, however, not now take up the time of this Society longer, than by giving one of the many examples that I could bring forward in proof of this assertion being well founded; and this example I shall draw from a subject which cannot bear a dispute as to its being of volcanic origin and which, according to my opinion, will alone prove decisive. 
   The Eolean or Lipari Islands, are clearly ascertained to be of volcanic origin ; the greater part of them have been visited by men of science, who, from their geological knowledge, were perfectly adequate to ascertain of what materials they are formed, and to describe those materials scientifically. Felicuda, is one of the most western of this group of islands. It is generally reckoned from eight to nine miles in circumference, and is entirely formed of lava and other volcanic productions. In the interior of this island, there is a mountain of considerable height, upon the summit of which may be traced the principal crater of this now extinguished volcano.
  The form of this crater is a regular cone inverted, and its lip nearly measures half a mile in .circumference. From this mouth, and from its sides, have flowed many streams of lava, some of which may still be traced in various directions. Where these streams had flowed over planes slightly inclined, their surfaces in general continued to be tolerably smooth ; but where descents were more rapid, there in many places, the surface-crust of the lava had burst, and in such a situation, it presented a broken, rough, and rugged appearance.
  One of these streams of lava, I was enabled to trace until it arrived at the verge of the island, where it had dropt into the sea over a lava rock nearly perpendicular, and which rose from the level of the water to a height of not less than from sixty to seventy feet. The lava here, even after it had passed over the verge of this precipitous declivity, still retained for a short distance a considerable degree of smoothness, but which was soon broken in upon by narrow longitudinal furrows appearing upon its surface. These lines at first, only slightly marked their directions but, as they descended, they became deeper and deeper, until their interstices began to assume an approach towards form, and near to the water, these forms were seen perfectly columnar. At this place, the columnar forms thus produced, by the congelation and shrinking of the lava, had generally three, and some of them four sides ; one of which sides, always continued attached to the amorphous mass of lava from which the column had shrunk. Upon some other parts of the shores of this island, I observed these forms arrested in various stages towards complete columnar shape. In some of those situations, the striae or lines had only appeared, in others, form was slightly indicated ; in some places they were seen half formed, and in others, their formation was complete.
  Upon the sides of the island, where these forms occurred overhanging the sea, I observed that they seldom or ever arrived at a full completion of their figures, until they approached nearly the surface of the water, and they continued perfect in form as far under the surface of the water as I could distinguish them with my eye. The columnar forms which I saw upon this island, were in general four-sided, but there also occurs among them many of three, and some of five sides ; but those last of pentagonal form, are rare. The general run of their diameters seldom exceed two feet.

   In one part of this island, I discovered a great accumulation of fragments of obsidian and of pumice; but these are two substances, which some geologists will not admit to be of igneous: origin. With regard to this point in dispute, I must here repeat what I have already observed in another part of this memoir, that those who hold obsidian and pumice not to be of igneous' origin',- most certainly can never have trod true volcanic ground. Proofs of these two substances being of igneous origin, are to be seen upon Etna, Vesuvius, and upon some of the Lipari Islands ; and those proofs which I have there seen, appeared to me so evident, that their origin could admit of no' dispute. One or two examples of these proofs, I shall here beg leave to give, by copying some of the notes which I took while on the Island of Felicuda. Near the centre of the island, somewhat to the south-east of the principal mountain which I have had already occasion to mention, I discovered the remains of a crater upon an insulated hill, which I found entirely formed of different coatings of lava of various thicknesses. In two different currents of the lava proceeding from the broken crater of this hill, I observed obsidian which had been in flow with the lava/ and now formed part of its congealed stream. This obsidian when in mass, appeared almost black and opake but, at the edges of its beautiful eonchoidal fracture, it was in some degree translucent, and there shewed a muddy-brown colour. In some parts of this obsidian, it is seen deviating from its brilliancy, and from its compact vitreous texture, and is evidently seen passing into a granular lava ; but the marks of this gradual transition are soon lost, and the lava into which the obsidian had passed, is then not to be distinguished in colour, in fracture, nor in texture, from the general lava of the other parts of the stream. Where this obsidian appears in mass, and in a state of perfect glass, it is very near to where it has been first ejected from the side of the crater, and in a situation where it must have undergone a rapid cooling. In some parts of these congealed streams, I could trace a transition of the obsidian into pumice. In those places, the obsidian was seen to contain scattered air-globules, which were almost always lengthened in the direction of the stream. These globules gradually augmented in number until the whole of the substance became a light, fragile and frothy pumice.
  At the place where I discovered the great accumulation of obsidian and pumice, mentioned above, I saw and obtained many specimens of all the transitions here described. In the various streams of lava which had flowed from the principal and central crater of this island, I found many indications of pumice, but none of obsidian.

  The above observations relative to some of the facts and tenets connected with the two theories in geology, which are so much at variance with each other, are certainly in a great degree foreign to the greater part of the subject which this paper was originally intended to embrace. But having, in the first part of this memoir, carefully avoided mixing description with theory, and as a phenomenon occurs in the district described, which is one of the controverted points, I have presumed to lay before this Society a few of the facts which relate to both of the theories, and which consist of those alone which have fallen under my own observations when visiting various parts of the globe ; but, in doing so, I am afraid, that according to the opinion of some, and perhaps according to my own, I have been led into a digression, which I have made too multifarious, and considerably too long ; for which I here beg leave to apologize.
  I, however, cannot here refrain from adding one more observation relative to an extreme bad effect which a violent support of theory in geology leads to, and which I am certain, must have been observed and regretted by all impartial geologists. Where the too keen and extravagant support of theory has crept in, and where prejudice has taken root we must bid adieu to all candid geographical description. Not that I here mean to allege, that all describers of geological scenery, under these influences, would intentionally mislead ; but many of them stray into error without they themselves being aware of their giving false description. Their minds are warped without their knowing it; and their jaundiced eyes see all objects around them yellow, and they describe accordingly. Reasoning and argument may then be dropped ; as the strongly prejudiced mind is not to be convinced, even by a clear demonstration of truth.


