IN South Wales, immediately below every regular seam of coal, and coextensive with it, lies a bed of clay, which is commonly called underclay, underclift, understone, bottomstone, or pouncing. It is of so peculiar a character, and the miners are so well acquainted with it, that there is scarcely one who would not immediately recognize a specimen of it, and state its position in relation to the coal.
  From several sections made with care in various places, it has been clearly ascertained that the coal-measures of South Wales, from the mountain limestone upwards, attain in the deepest part the great geological thickness of 12,000 to 13,000 feet. They contain nearly 100 thick and thin seams of coal, about one half of which, measuring a foot and upwards in thickness, have in various places been more or less worked, and I am not aware of a single instance of a seam unaccompanied in any part by this subjacent bed ; indeed so thoroughly is the Welsh miner persuaded that the two things are essentially conjoined, that he would as soon expect to live in a house without a foundation as to work in a coal-seam which did not rest upon underclay. It is very necessary that he should be familiar with the material, as it occasionally serves a most important purpose in prosecuting the work of a coal-mine; for though there is never coal without a subjacent bed of underclay, there is sometimes underclay without superincumbent coal. A seam of coal which becomes thinner by degrees will occasionally vanish altogether; but, after a short distance, it will appear with increased thickness, and ultimately regain its original dimensions. When a collier, meeting with an irregularity of this description, perceives the coal disappear, he might find it difficult to know whether he had not suddenly come upon a fault completely dislocating the measures, if he had not the underclay to guide his course; and it is only when this fails, that he feels assured, the direction of his search must be changed.
  This underclay, as its name imports, is generally more or less argillaceous, but it is never without a considerable admixture of sand; and it is always of a fine texture, yielding in most cases a very good fire-clay. In many parts of the coal-deposit of South Wales, it is tough, though not very hard, when fresh cut, but on exposure to the weather it slacks, splits, and crumbles into a greyish mass. It is occasionally quite black, from an admixture of carbonaceous matter, and is then sometimes sufficiently consistent to resist the effects of weather; and under some of the lowest seams of coal between Swansea and the Bury river, it yields a hard, durable, fine-grained, siliceous stone, very much resembling quartz rock.
  It is not, however, by the mineralogical composition that these beds are so thoroughly marked, for they not only vary considerably, but many strata occurring in other parts of the coal-measures, are precisely identical in mineral contents. The grand distinguishing feature of the underclays is the peculiar character of the vegetable organic remains : these are always of one kind (Stigmaria Ficoides), and are so diffused throughout every part of the bed, that by their uniform effect alone the clay is readily recognized by the eye of the miner.
  The beds, varying in thickness from six inches to more than ten feet, and averaging about three, are crossed and penetrated vertically, horizontally, and obliquely, by a confused and tangled collection of long, slender, fibrous casts, with a thin coating of carbonaceous matter. These fibres are sometimes cylindrical, though generally flat, and are usually about a quarter of an inch in breadth ; but they are very often traceable to a junction with a stem or branch, sometimes flattened, sometimes not, and varying in diameter from about two inches to half a foot. From this stem or branch, which is usually of considerable length, and always lies in the plane of the bed, but rather nearer the top than the bottom, the fibres radiate in all directions, and take such a tortuous irregular course that it is impossible to follow any one of them to the natural termination, though it is easy to see that the range is very considerable. This fossil, the Stigmaria Ficoides, taking for granted that the slender fibrous impressions belong always to it, so completely fills every bed of underclay, that it is not possible to cut out a cubic foot which does not contain portions of the plant. It is also worthy of remark, that specimens with the fibres emanating from the stem or branch are to be discovered only in the underclay.
  It is proper, however, to state, that such specimens, even if they did exist in other beds, are not so likely to become exposed in them ; whereas the operations of extensive collieries naturally afford the opportunity of making vast collections from the underclays ; for when a coal-seam is either throughout or partially too thin to permit the excavation of the coal without the removal of some portion of the ground in juxtaposition to it, the superior softness of the floor induces the miner to make the required cuttings in it rather than in the ceiling; or when it becomes necessary to obviate the effects of a “ creep” in any of the roads, it is again the floor that is pared down, and in these and other ways a large amount of specimens in the underclays is exposed. Sometimes however the ceiling of one coal-seam is the floor of another, and in such instances, if the collector were on the lower bed, he might discover above him specimens that would appear to contradict what is above stated as a general rule, while it is obvious, an attentive examination of the case would only confirm the truth of it. That bare stems or branches of Stigmaria have been found in other beds there can be no reasonable doubt, indeed it would be very surprising if many such instances did not occur ; for even if the underclay were the natural and original site of the plant, specimens must have been occasionally washed out of their first position and deposited in some superior bed at the time of forming.
  The Stigmaria Ficoides is described by all those who have written on the subject as the most abundant plant of our carboniferous series; but no one has given a fuller account of the localities in which it is found, of the external botanical character it bears, and of the attitude it generally presents in situ, than Mr. Steinhauer in the American Philosophical Transactions ; and his description is so applicable to the condition of the plant in coal strata, which for the last seven years have been the constant object of my own investigation, that 1 shall quote a part of his description. 
  He says, “ It is most abundant in the fine-grained siliceous stone provincially called Calliard and Gannister, and in some of the coal-binds or crowstones. It is rather less frequent in the beds of scaly clay, or clay mixed with siliceous sand and mica; very common but completely compressed in the coal-shales or bituminous slate-clay; of occasional occurrence in the argillaceous ironstone; not rare in the common grit and upper thick beds of argillaceo-micaceous sandstone or rag ; and sometimes, though rarely, discoverable in the coal itself.”—“ The most perfect form in which this fossil occurs is that of a cylinder more or less compressed, and generally flatter on one side than the other. Not unfrequently the flattened side turns in so as to form a groove. The surface is marked in quincuncial order with pustules, or rather depressed areolae, with a rising in the middle, in the centre of which rising a minute speck is often observable. From different modes and degrees of compression, and probably from different states of the original vegetable, these areolae assume very different appearances; sometimes running into indistinct rimae, like the bark of an ancient willow; sometimes, as in the shale impressions, exhibiting little more than a neat sketch of the concentric circles.”
   In speaking of the fibres connected with these centre cylinders, Mr. Steinhauer remarks, “We were soon able to detect their remains, forming considerable masses of stone, particularly coal-bind, on Web- sey Slack, and at Lower Wyke, where their contorted figures imitate those of Serpulae; but it excited much surprise, on examining the projecting ends of some trunks which lay horizontally in a bed of clay extending along the southern bank of the rivulet which separates the townships of Pudsey and Tong, and which is exposed in several places, to find traces of these fibres proceeding from the centre cylinder in rays through the stratum in every direction to the distance of twenty feet. Repeated observations, and the conviction of unprejudiced persons made attentive to the phaenomena, compelled the belief that they originally belonged to the trunks in question, and consequently that the vegetable grew in its present horizontal position at a time that the stratum was in a state capable of supporting its vegetation, and shot out its fibres in every direction through the then yielding mud. For if it grew erect, even admitting the fibres to have been as rigid as the firmest spines with which we are acquainted, it would be difficult to devise means gentle enough to bring it into a recumbent posture without deranging their position. This supposition gains strength from the circumstance that they are found lying in all directions across one another, and not directed towards any particular point of the compass.”
  Excepting that I never saw a mass of fibres extend to a vertical distance of more than seven or eight feet from the centre cylinder, although I believe it may range to twenty and more horizontally, the latter part of this quotation describes very fairly the general attitude in which every specimen is discovered in the underclays of South Wales; and when it is considered, that in so wide a district of country abounding in coal, there is not a seam which is not immediately underlaid by a bed wholly monopolized by these peculiar vegetable organic remains, it is impossible to avoid the inference, that some essential and necessary connection exists between the production of the one and the existence of the other. To account for the unfailing combination by drift, seems an unsatisfactory hypothesis; but whatever may be the mutual dependence of the phaenomena, they give us reasonable grounds to suppose that in the Stigmaria Ficoides we have the plant to which the earth is mainly indebted for those vast stores of fossil fuel which are now so indispensable to the comfort and prosperity of its inhabitants.
   I have stated (p. 491) that the coal deposit of South Wales, from the mountain limestone upwards, attains, in the deepest part, the enormous thickness of 12,000 feet. It will naturally occur to every one, that the accumulation of such a vast amount of material would require the lapse of a great period of time, and as any fact which can afford a probable measure of the comparative extent of such a period must possess some interest, I shall take this opportunity of mentioning one that bears on the subject.
From the top of a seam of common bituminous coal, about five feet thick, at Penclawdd, on the Bury river, I obtained, in the spring of 1833, a small, worn or rounded boulder of cannel coal, six inches long, four inches wide, and two inches thick. It was almost wholly imbedded in a layer of indurated clay two inches thick, interposed between the coal and the regular roof of hard sandstone, and which touched the upper side of the boulder. After the discovery of this singular specimen, attention was awakened to the subject, and it was found that in the quarries excavated in the enormous deposit of sandstone forming Cilfay Hill and the town hill range from Swansea to the Bury river, there occur many irregular beds of what, from the innumerable pebbles and small boulders of coal aggregated in them, may be termed a coal conglomerate. The coal pebbles are sometimes four inches in diameter, and are confusedly mingled with sand and pebbles of ironstone ; and associated with them have likewise been found small boulders of granite and mica slate. Many casts of Sigillarise and other plants, coated with coal, occur in the mass ; and the difference in the age of this coal and that of the pebbles is beau¬tifully illustrated in numerous cases, where the plants have been pressed down on a layer of coal pebbles, which, from their superior hardness, have penetrated into the plants, and thus the newer and older coal have been brought into juxtaposition ; but the crystallization of the former, however distorted the plant may have been, presents a uniform parallelism in the faces of its cleavage, while the cleavage of the older coal is parallel with the sides of the pebbles, which lie in all positions, and very often exhibits the form of a rhomboid with its edges and corners rounded by attrition. The coal of the pebbles, like that of the regular seams in the neighbourhood, is of the common bituminous kind, but among them have been found two small ones consisting of cannel coal.
  The Cilfay sandstones, and the measures at Penclawdd, in which the first-mentioned pebbles were found, form part of the Pennant grit of Mr. Conybeare, and there is reason to believe that throughout the whole of this great mass of sandstone, in thickness about 3000 feet, there are occasionally beds of coal pebbles.
  I have not seen any of them associated with the lower seams. If none exist, it might be inferred that the pebbles in the Pennant grit were derived from them, after the coal-beds of the lower measures had been indurated, converted, and crystallized. Now as the only beds of cannel coal in the lower measures, to yield the pebble found at Penclawdd, are two or three lying about 2000 feet below the coal-seam, it follows that the deposit of these 2000 feet must have required at least the time necessary to convert vegetable matter into good pit-coal; and if it is not assuming too much to suppose that the deposit proceeded at an equal rate from the beginning to the end, six times that period must have elapsed before the accumulation of the whole coal-field of South Wales was completed.


