THE reasons which induced me to assume on zoological evidence, that the limestones of Southern Devon, between Dartmoor and the coast, would prove to be of the age of the old red sandstone, not having been placed on record in a separate form, Mr. Murchison has begged me to lay before the Society a distinct notice of my claim to having been the first to propose the classification recently put forth by Professor Sedgwick and himself; and in consequence of an extension of those views to Belgium and the Boulonnais, Dr. Fitton has urged me to comply with the request. In the memoirsf in which Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison announced the change in their classification of the older sedimentary strata^ of Devonshire and Cornwall, the clearest and amplest acknowledgements are made of my share in promoting the alteration; but as it is possible that some mistake may hereafter arise, relative to the nature and limits of my suggestion, I conceive it is a duty to others as well as to myself to comply with the above request. I regret, however, that I cannot make this notice as satisfactory as I could wish, from the whole of the data not being accessible; and I regret that my official duties have prevented me from bestowing upon it that time and thought and research which ought to be evident in the shortest communications read to this Society.
   Before I state the nature of my claim, I consider myself called upon to give, as far as I am able, a brief summary of the opinions previously entertained by geologists respecting the age of the South Devon limestones, that the proportionate amount of priority of claim may be duly estimated.
    
   Maton notices the South Devon limestones and places those on the eastern side of the Tavey in argillaceous slate ; but in his geological map the same character is employed for the Devonshire limestones, the mountain limestone and the oolitic series. (Tour through the Western Counties, vol. i. pp. 121, 289, 290, 1797.)
   Playfair notices a bivalve shell which he found in a loose specimen of schistose micaceous limestone opposite Stonehouse; and he adds, there are certainly no rocks more decidedly primary than those which surround Plymouth. He considered the limestones of Berry Head to be of the same age. (Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory, note iv. p. 164, 1802, French Translation, p. 54, note.)
   In 1809, Dr. Berger and M. Louis Albert Necker made their joint examination of Devonshire and Cornwall; and they both considered the limestones to be transition. They observed no organic remains. (Dr. Berger, Geol. Trans., 1st Series, vol. i., p. 103. 1811. Necker, MS. Catal.)
   De Luc mentions frequently the Plymouth, Chudleigh, and other limestones of Southern Devon ; and describing a quarry near Sequer’s Bridge, he says, “ The strata much resemble the most ancient secondary limestones of the Alps, which contain but very few marine bodies.” He observed none in that quarry. (Geol. Travels in England, vol. ii. p. 342 ; see also Index to vol. xi. 1811.)
   Dr. Thomas Thomson assigned the Plymouth limestones to the transition class. He sought likewise carefully for fossils, but equally without success. (Ann. of Phil., vol. ii. p. 248, 1813.)
   Dr. Kidd placed the Devonshire marbles in the transition limestones of Werner, including in them the mountain-limestone. (Geological Essay, pp. 93, 94, 1815.)
   In Mr. William Smith’s map of England (1815), the limestones are coloured as portions of the transition series.
   Mr. Brande, in his Outlines, considers the Plymouth calcareous rocks as mountain-limestone, and states that they rest immediately upon slate. (Outlines of Geol. p. 90, 1817.)
   The late Mr. W. Phillips assigned them to the transition series. (Outlines, 1st edit. p. 210, 1816; Selection of Facts, p. 162, 1818.)
   In Mr. Hennah’s first notices on the organic remains of the Plymouth rocks, the age of the strata is not defined ; but it is impossible to pass over the first communications of a geologist to whose labours we are indebted for a large share of that evidence by which the classification of the Devonshire formations will be decided. (Geol. Trans., 1st Series, vol. iv. p. 410, 1817.)
   In Mr. Greenough’s First Principles of Geology, (p. 219) published in 1819, the Plymouth calcareous rocks are noticed as examples of mountain limestone, resting immediately upon slate, to the exclusion of the old red sandstone ; but in the first edition of his geological map (1820) the whole of the South Devon limestones are coloured as belonging to the greywacke series.
   In a memoir on Cornwall, Professor Sedgwick, in alluding to Mr. Hennah’s collection of organic remains, states his belief that the fossils cannot be identified with those of the mountain-limestone; and he adds, “ It would introduce great confusion not to separate the limestones of Devonshire from the great metalliferous limestones.” (Trans. Phil. Soc. Cambridge, vol.i. p. 142,1820, 1821.)
   The Rev. W. Conybeare, in his Outlines (p. 353, 1822), and in his memoir on the mountain chains of Europe, (Ann. Phil., vol. xxi. p. 7, 1823) and Dr. Buckland in his description of the caves at Oreston and the fissures at Chudleigh (Reliquice Dil., p. 59, note e. 1823), consider the South Devon limestones as transition.
   The Rev. J. J. Conybeare assigned the dark limestones to his “ superior slate,” and the coral limestones to his “ sand slate ” division. (Ann. Phil. 1823, vol. xxi. p. 185.)
   MM. Dufrenoy and Elie de Beaumont, who visited England in 1823, place them in the greywacke series. (Voy. Metal, p. 11, 1824.)
   About the year 1824, Mr. Hennah published his account of the limestone rocks of Plymouth ; and considered them, on account of the abundance of their organic remains, to be “ among the mountain-limestones, and of an ancient rather than a recent date ”: the fossils of Torquay, Petit Tor, and the surrounding neighbourhood, are said to be for the most part similar, (pp. 38, 63.)
   Mr. De la Beche, in a Memoir on Tor and Babacombe Bays, states that the limestones rest upon old red sandstone, and contain fossils which have been discovered in the carboniferous limestone of other places. (Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. iii. p. 163.)
   In the Transactions of the Plymouth Institution, is a paper by Mr. Prideaux, containing the following passage ; “ Catdown and Teats’ Hill are entirely limestone, which very soon after parting from the slate assumes a reddish hue, from the presence of siliceous matter of that colour; this presently after appears in bulk in the character of the old red sandstone, alternating with the limestone, south, though much less strikingly than the slate does northward.” Mr. Prideaux also observes, There is a marked diversity in the texture, position, and contained animal reliques of the limestones, and that the eastern is probably older than the western ; referred by Mr. De la Beche to the carboniferous series. (Trans. Plym. Instit. pp. 36 and 43, 1828-1830.)
   Dr. Boase, in his elaborate Memoir on the Geology of Cornwall (1830-1831), speaks doubtingly of the age of the limestone on the west side of Plymouth Harbour, not having been able to determine its connection with the greywacke. The strata of Cawsand Bay he states is generally believed to be old red sandstone. (Trans. Geol. Soc. Cornwall, vol. iv. pp. 216, 218.)
   In all the editions of Mr. De la Beche’s Manual (1831 to 1833), the limestones on the southern side of Tor Bay are included in the greywacke series ; but the author considers it exceedingly difficult, in consequence of the greywacke sometimes being undistinguishable from the old red sandstone, to determine the age of those limestones of Southern Devonshire, which are much broken by faults, greatly disturbed and contorted or much concealed by the new red sandstone (1st edition, p. 438, and note, 1831; 2nd edition, p. 454, and note, 1832 ; 3rd edition, p. 420, and note, 1833).
   About the year 1833 appeared the valuable article on Geology in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, by Mr. J. Phillips. It contains extensive lists of organic remains, assigned to the primary (transition) class ; but the author leaves to future observers to determine whether the South Devon limestones belong to the transition series (p. 574, 577).
   In the two first editions of the same author’s Guide (p. 115, 1834 and 1835), the sedimentary rocks of Devonshire are also placed in the primary class ; and in the 3rd edition (1836), their position is not defined, it being only stated that some portion of North and South Devon belong to the Cambrian System, and that much of the killas of Cornwall is not more ancient (1st edition, p. 115 ; 2nd edition, p. 129 ; 3rd edition, p. 140).
   In the abstract of a paper read in January 1836, by Mr. De la Beche, the whole of the greywacke of Devon and Cornwall is said to be older than the Silurian formations. (Geol. Proceedings, vol. ii., p. 225.)
   In a Memoir on the country between the Ex and Berry Head and Dartmoor and the coast,read May 1836, Mr. Austen mentioned the transition rocks as containing beds of limestone rich in organic remains. (Geol. Proceedings, vol. ii. p. 414.)
   It was at the Bristol Meeting of the British Association, August 1836, that Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison read their first memoir on the structure of Devonshire, in which they proved, for the first time, that the culm-measures of the central part of the county are newer than any of the stratified groups associated with them, and of the age of the carboniferous series; and though they did not describe the country south of Dartmoor, yet the calcareous rocks of that district were considered to be on a parallel with the lowest division of the North Devon series, or in the middle division of the Cambrian System. The same view is maintained in the paper read to this Society in May and June, 1837. (Athenaeum, 1836, p. 611, section, p. 612; Reports of British Association, vol. v., p. 93 ; Geol.Proceedings, vol. ii., p. 560.)
   Mr. Phillips, in his work on Geology forming vols. xcvii. and cxi. of the Cabinet Cyclopedia, describing the fossils of the primary class (including the transition or grey wacke series), states that “ the Plymouth and South Devon shells, supposed to be identical with species of the mountain- limestone, are in general, excepting perhaps some from Newton Bushel, quite distinct, as I learn from a sight of Mr. Hennah’s and other specimens” (vol. i. (xcvii.) p. 140).
   In Mr. Austen’s communication, read December 1837, the limestones were described as occurring in the uppermost portion of the transition or greywacke series of South Devon ; but he expressed verbally his belief that they were the equivalents of the mountain-limestone; and he called attention to some fossils which he thought would bear him out. (Geol. Proc vol. ii. p. 584.) It was immediately after the reading of that paper, and partly from an examination of Mr. Austen’s specimens, that I formed the opinion relative to the limestones of Devonshire being of the age of the old red sandstone ; and which I afterwards suggested first to Mr. Murchison and then to Prof. Sedgwick, and at a later period, in 1838, to Mr. De la Beche and other Fellows of the Society.
   Mr. Bakewell considers these calcareous formations as belonging to the lower transition limestones. (Introduction to Geol., 3rd edit., p. 136, 1838.)
   Mr. De la Beche’s valuable Report on Cornwall and Devonshire appeared early in 1839. In this work, the limestones, with the associated clay-slates, are placed in the greywacke group (p. 64, et seq.). With reference to the lists of fossils, given on the authority of Mr. James Sowerby, Mr. De la Beche says, “ Organic remains have been detected, more particularly near Newton Bushel and Ogwell, among which many shells bear so great a resemblance to others detected in the true carboniferous or mountain-limestone, that at a first glance they might be considered of the same species. How far they may bear that careful scrutiny to which they will probably be subjected, remains to be seen. In the mean time, however, the near approximation to form, supposing, for the sake of argument, that it is merely a near approximation of those shells to species well known in the true carboniferous limestone, is a subject of considerable interest ” (p. 75). “ There is nothing in the shells found in the Plymouth limestones, which should prevent us from considering them a continuation of the beds of Newton Bushel and Torquay.” “ On the contrary, an approach to, if not an identity with, forms of shells discovered generally in the true carboniferous limestone, seems characteristic of the two localities.” “ Now, whatever doubt may exist as to the true age of the Newton Bushel and Torquay limestones, the position of the Plymouth limestones is clearly amid the slates and sandstones of South Devon, and whatever geological age be assigned to the latter would appear to be common also to the former ” (p. 76).
   “ Those,” Mr. De la Beche adds, “ who rely very exclusively on the character of organic remains, would probably feel disposed to consider the Torbay and Plymouth beds as equivalent to some such rock as the old red sandstone ” (p. 150 ; see also note, p. 149).
   In March 1839, Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison adopted their present classification of the older sedimentary rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall, partly on the suggestion respecting the age of the South Devon limestones, partly from a re-survey of the country to the south of Dartmoor by Professor Sedgwick, and partly in consequence of an examination of the fossil evidence then determined by Mr. Phillips, Mr. James Sowerby, and the author of this notice. The change in their views they announced in a paper in the Philosophical Magazine and in a memoir read to this Society. In both these documents the most unequivocal testimony is borne to any claim of mine in having promoted the new classification. (Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag., April 1839; ante,
p. 688.)
   It is not necessary to offer any remarks on the papers which have been read to the Society, or have been published since those last noticed ; and I have forborne alluding to the memoirs on North Devon by Mr. Weaver and the Rev. David Williams. It is requisite, however, to state, that Mr. James Sowerby, from his first inspection of the Bradley fossils to the promulgation of the old red or Devonian classification, considered the limestones to belong to the true carboniferous series.
  Such is my brief summary of opinions respecting the age of the limestones south of Dartmoor; and I have confined the extracts solely to them, because I alluded to them alone, when I threw out the suggestion respecting their age. I then knew little of the structure of Devonshire, and great was my surprise when told by Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison of their bold removal of the whole of the schistose and greywacke rocks of that county and Cornwall, to the old red sandstone—a generalization which could only arise from long, patient, accurate, and extensive practice in the field ; and a willingness to adopt a suggestion from whatever quarter it might be advanced.
  Three of the foregoing memoirs claim a few remarks; namely, Mr. De la Beche’s on Tor and Babacombe Bays ; Mr. Prideaux’s on Plymouth ; and Mr. Phillips’s article in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana. It will be most convenient to take Mr. Prideaux’s communication first.
  That gentleman’s inference of the age of the sandstone associated with the limestone was clearly deduced from mineral characters ; yet full credit must be given to him for placing part of the limestones in the old red sandstone. He says nothing respecting the zoological evidence, though acquainted with Mr. Hennah’s collection of fossils ; and he considered the Plymouth limestone might be a different formation from the Torbay.
  Mr. De la Beche’s memoir on Tor and Babacombe Bays contains a list of twenty-one species of fossils, determined by Mr. James Sowerby. It was of great value as the first attempt to define the zoological characters of the Devonshire calcareous rocks. In the list, two mountain-limestone species, Cardium aliforme, (believed by the author of this notice to be a distinct species) and Bellerophon tenuifasciata, were positively identified, and two doubtfully, Spirifera rotundata, and Pteurotomaria carinata ; and of the remainder, eight were considered to be new or found only in the Devonshire limestones, and nine too indistinct to be named specifically. The amount of evidence in this list in favour of the Torbay limestones being of the age of the carboniferous series, was very small; yet in the absence of the Trilobites and other fossils of Dudley, at that time considered proofs of the transition class, it was far more justifiable to adopt the view put forth in Mr. De la Beche’s paper, and to assume that the new species were only a legitimate addition to the Fauna of the mountain-limestone, than that they marked a distinct period of organic life. (Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. iii. p. 164.)
  Mr. Phillips’s lists of fossils in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana were especially valuable, when published, by giving the foreign and British localities at which each species was considered to have been found. The list assigned to the transition series contains thirty-eight species of Devonshire shells, eleven of which are shown to occur also at Paffrath, Bensberg, the Eifel, and in Gothland, then considered true greywacke or transition districts below the old red sandstone. It is worthy of remark, however, that only three species, Producta depressa, Terebratula affinis, and Orthoceras circulare, are stated to be found at Dudley or Ledbury ; one, Pileopsis vetusta, near Ludlow ; and one, Cirrus acutus, at Tortworth ; and no other English transition localities are mentioned. Twenty-one of the Devonshire shells are further marked as common to the transition and carboniferous systems ; and Mr. Phillips, with a just view of the tendency of this evidence, remarks, “ We must leave it to future observers to say whether it is quite certain that the limestones of Devonshire really belong to the transition series, a point on which we cannot avoid feeling some doubt.” (Encyc. Metrop., p. 573-577.)
  At that time Mr. Murchison’s Silurian System was not published, and Mr. Phillips had therefore only one of the two terms of comparison necessary for establishing the true age of the limestones. He had also a knowledge of only a part of the fossils of the county. If he had been supplied with these requisites for forming a right judgement, who can doubt the result ?
  In dwelling for a moment on the attempts to define the age of the limestone, it is curious to perceive how the opinion of the same observer has occasionally oscillated between the mountain-limestone and the upper portions of the transition series ; in consequence, no doubt, of the want of that preponderating weight of evidence which is necessary to satisfy the mind of the practical workman, and enable it to rest steadily on its own decisions. If it should be considered that a better result is now attainable, it must be remembered that a great amount of evidence has been lately accumulated, not in Devonshire only, but in other and distant parts of the kingdom. Until the organic remains of the mountain-limestone and of the Silurian system had been determined, it was vain to speculate on the age of a series of fossils, procured from a region but partially examined, beset with faults, and traversed by igneous rocks.
  I will now state briefly the zoological evidence on which I assumed that the Newton Bushel and other limestones would prove to be of the age of the old red sandstone.
   It has been already mentioned, that the suggestion was first proposed in December 1837. I had previously examined in part, the corals of the Silurian system and of South Devonshire, and satisfied myself that some of the species are common to both. I had also examined with Mr. James Sowerby, on its first arrival in London, Mr. Hennah’s valuable collection of fossils, and had become aware, by the remarks of Mr. Sowerby, that certain of the shells, found near Plymouth, could with difficulty, if at all, be distinguished from mountain-limestone species, and that some were distinct. Immediately after the reading of Mr. Austen’s paper in December 1837, I had the pleasure of examining with that gentleman a part of his collection ; and though I ventured to dissent from some of the identifications with mountain-limestone shells, pointed out to me (Pleurorhynchus minax, Terebratula acuminata), yet the fossils agreed so much in aspect with Testacea of the carboniferous Fauna, that it was impossible to doubt, that the beds from which the specimens had been obtained, had some connexion with the mountain-limestone system. From an examination of the collection, 1 also ascertained that in the same limestones with these shells, occur corals common in the Silurian system. Through the kind communications of Mr. Austen, 1 had likewise become aware that the Calceola sandalina, a shell previously obtained only from districts on the Rhine, and considered to be transition, existed in Devonshire in beds associated with the limestones; and that he had obtained many new cephalopods and other fossils from the same districts.
   It was therefore by combining together this evidence—the presence, in the same series of beds, of shells resembling or identical with mountain-limestone species, of Silurian corals, the Calceola sandalina, and various distinct Testacea,—that I was induced to suggest that the South Devon limestones are of an intermediate age between the carboniferous and Silurian systems, and consequently of the age of the old red sandstone. It is necessary to add that Mr. Murchison had shown that there is a regular passage from the old red sandstone upwards into the carboniferous system, and downwards into the Silurian, and that the suites of fossils of the two systems are perfectly distinct.
   This amount of evidence would most probably have been insufficient for minds disciplined to draw conclusions only from long-continued and rigidly conducted researches, and have deterred their possessors from hazarding an opinion on a disputed point; but it is hoped, that, for once, a less commendable method of deducing a conclusion has not led to error.
   Appended to this notice is a list of fossils, somewhat hastily prepared and necessarily very incomplete. It has been compiled in part from Mr. Hennah’s valuable collection, with the assistance of Mr. James Sowerby; and it is impossible to allude to that collection without speaking in terms of the warmest admiration of the liberality of spirit, which placed the whole series at the command of Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison ; and of the zeal and assiduity with which the smallest specimens have been collected and preserved.
I have also been permitted to use a valuable manuscript list drawn up by Mr. Austen, in part from specimens named by M. de Yerneuil ; and I have taken advantage of the information contained in the published lists of Mr. De la Beche and Mr. Phillips. I may be permitted to add, that I have compared, as far as I have been able, the species mentioned in those documents with accessible specimens, particularly a portion of Mr. Austen’s valuable collection, and another kindly lent me by Mr. Daniel Sharpe.
   The list contains 62 species, 10 of which have been assigned to carboniferous fossils, and 13 to Silurian; and the remaining 39 have not, it is believed, been found in England except in the limestones and associated beds of South Devonshire. In the list is not noticed a large number of fossils still unnamed, including many species in Mr. Hennah’s and Mr. Austen’s collections.
   The ten species considered to agree with mountain-limestone fossils, do not include one decided coral common to the carboniferous and Devonshire limestones. The shells are Terebratula fiexistria, T. acuminata, T. pugnus, T. Mantis, Spivifera (Trigonotreta) oblata, S. subconica? Pecten plicatus, Pileopsis vetustus ? Buccinum imbricatum and B. acutum. The four species marked with an asterisk I have not seen, but they are included on the authority of Mr. Austen’s and Mr. Phillips’s lists. The Cyrtia and Pileopsis are also not positively identified.
   The whole of the nine species occur in that lower portion of the carboniferous limestone series, to which the term carboniferous or mountain-limestone has been particularly applied ; but it is a subject of regret, that we have not more precise data respecting the distribution of organic remains in that formation, which not unfrequently equals in thickness the oolitic series of Wiltshire ; yet it is well known that the fossils of the upper calcareous divisions of that oolitic series differ considerably from those in the lower.
   On the fossils considered peculiar to the Devonshire limestone it is not necessary to offer any remarks, for the present comparison is confined solely to England.
   Of the thirteen Silurian fossils eight are corals and five are shells. The latter are Terebratula prisca, T. aspera, T. JVilsoni, Spirifera (Trigonotreta) cassidea, and Spirifera trapezoidalis, but the T. Wilsoni and S. trapezoidalis are probably distinct from the Silurian shells. The corals are Favositespolymorpha, F. spongites, F. Gothlandica, F. fibrosa, Porites pyriformis, Cyathophyllum turbinatum, C. ccespitosum and Fenestella antiqua. The Favosites polymorpha occurs abundantly in Devonshire, and it is not rare in the upper Silurian formations; but the specimens which I have seen from Plymouth and Newton Bushel resemble more nearly the variety figured by Goldfuss from Paffrath than that found in the Ludlow rocks ; the Porites pyriformis is equally abundant in the limestones of Devonshire and Wenlock ; but the remaining five species, as far as I am acquainted with the collections of Mr. Hennah, Mr. Austen, and Mr. Sharpe, are not common. The more abundant corals are those peculiar to the limestones.
   A vast amount of work remains to be done with respect to the Devonshire organic remains ; but I rejoice to know that the task has been placed in the hands of Mr. Phillips, who is not only well qualified but ready to overcome every difficulty ; and it cannot be long before we are supplied with the fullest and most satisfactory information.
   If it should be urged, that it was unjustifiable to assume from organic remains alone, the age of the Devonshire limestones, it may be replied that at that time no base line had been laid down, south of Dartmoor, from which an order of superposition could be established. It may be also stated, that organic remains had not long before proved faithful guides in a district in which mineral character and order of superposition were inapplicable. Through the exertions of Captain Smee, Colonel Pottinger, Colonel Sykes, and Captain Grant, we had become aware of the existence of two series of formations in Cutch and the Desert to the eastward ; and that one of them could be placed in the parallel of the oolite series of England, because its fossils were generically and in part specifically the same, and differed as a whole generically and essentially from the fossils of any known transition or tertiary district. In this instance we have an example of organic remains enabling the geologist to unite tracts separated by continents,—not, be it observed, by establishing the identity of the fossils of subdivisions of formations, but on the broad basis of the Fauna of a peculiar period in the history of our globe. (See ante, pp. 289, 715.)
   Again, another instance may be quoted of the value of organic remains, if rightly applied, in determining the relative geological age of a distant region, and in the present case of one inaccessible to Europeans. The Ammonites lately laid upon the Society’s table by a near relative of the lamented Captain Alexander Gerard, and specimens of which have been long known, prove 
the existence on the Tartar side of the Himalaya mountains of a secondary formation, not by specific identifications, but by the structure of the chambers of the shells being of that peculiar nature, which is found only in Ammonites of the secondary series. It is not necessary to quote examples of districts, nearer home, which have been identified by organic remains. I beg, however, it may be clearly understood, that in advocating the value of fossils, I would not expunge from the geologist’s consideration the aid to be derived from order of superposition, and, under a right control, from the use of mineral composition and lithological structure. I would also advise him not to depend upon his own limited sources of knowledge, but to seek the aid of the philosophical zoologist, who can teach him to reason justly on the distribution of animal life—the accidents to which it is liable—the changes which such accidents may produce, or the means provided by nature to resist them —and on the effects which a permanent alteration in the inhabiting medium may work on the form and size of a shell or coral.
   I will now point out two cases, in which errors have apparently been committed by attempting to establish a parallelism of formations by mineral characters, and an insufficient inquiry into the organic remains.
   At the commencement of the present year my attention was more particularly redirected to M. Dumont’s work on part of Belgium, published in 1832, and especially to his identification of the formations contained in that district with those of the Silurian System. M. Dumont divides the terrain anthraxifere of M. d’Omalius d’Halloy, which occurs immediately beneath the true coal-measures, into the following four systems:
1. Systeme calcareux superieur.
2. Systeme quartzo-schisteux supirieur.
3. Systeme calcareux inferieur.
4. Systeme quartzo-schisteux inferieur.
Beneath the last occurs the terrain ardoisier.
   It was apparently no part of M. Dumont’s object at that time to place the Belgian systems on a parallel with the then established formations of England, though the list of fossils from the Systbme calcareux superieur identifies it completely with the mountain-limestone. M. Dumont, it is true, considers his lowest systeme to be the representative of the old red sandstone ; but the identification was made on mineral characters, and at the suggestion of Mr. Murchison.
   The Systeme quartzo-schisteux superieur was placed by Dr. Buckland in 1821 on a parallel with the old red sandstone, having taken for his base line the limestone of Namur, the true representative of the mountain-limestone. (Annals of Phil. 1821, June, p 465.)
   Mr. Conybeare, in “The Outlines of England and Wales” (note, p. 468, 1822), gives the following list of the formations beneath the coal strata of Belgium and the North of France, with English equivalents, the former being extracted from M. d’Omalius d’Halloy’s Memoire sur la Geologie du Nord de la France, (Journal des Mines, tome 24, 1806.)

Thus placing all the beds between “the limestone alternating with slate-clay” and “the clay-slate” in the old red sandstone.
   This arrangement M. Rozet appears to have followed in his description of Belgium, as he refers the psammites, &c., between the black limestone and the schists, to the old red sandstone ; alluding at the same time to the account of that formation, in The Outlines of Mr. Phillips and the Rev. J. Conybeare. (Ann. des Sciences Nat., tome 20, p. 146, 1830.)
   It was, I believe, at the Reunion extraordinaire of the Geological Society of France, at Mezires, in September 1835, (Bulletin Soc. Geol. de France, tome vi. p. 345, 1835,) that the first attempt was made to compare the Belgian formations with the Silurian system of England. At that meeting, Dr. Buckland drew up a table in which the following equivalents are given:

   With respect to the above comparisons it should be remembered, that in 1835 the Silurian system had not been made known in its full details, the fossils having been determined only in part; and the resemblance of the Belgian corals to Dudley species, justified a comparison of the calcareous strata of M. Dumont’s systems with the Dudley and Wenlock limestones.
   During the discussions which took place on the identity of the English and Belgian formations, M. Constant Prevost stated, that the calcaire bleu of the systeme calcareux inferieur reminded him strongly of the limestones of Plymouth, and that the marble of Heer, near Mezieres, composed for a great part of indistinct corals, and subordinate to the quartzo-schisleux superieur, appeared to him analogous to the limestones of Babbacombe. (Bulletin, pp. 353, 349.) Mr. Greenough expressed doubts of the identity of the Plymouth and Dudley limestones ; and stated that he had remarked the constant absence in the systtme calcareux inferieur of the Trilobites, and particularly the Caly- mene Blumenbachii, so common at Dudley. (Bulletin, p. 353.) The above remarks are valuable, bearing upon the question under examination, and they teach us the value of not rejecting from our consideration negative evidence, when attempts are made to compare systems of formations.
   At an ordinary meeting of the Geological Society of France, in December 1837, M. Rozet repeated his opinion that the old red sandstone is not wanting in Belgium, being well developed between Dinant and Namur; and M. Constant Prevost observed, that during the Reunion of the French Society at Mezieres, he had observed a great mass of psammites, red grits, and quartzose conglomerates in the district mentioned by M. Rozet, actually interposed between the Silurian schists and the carboniferous limestones, and representing consequently the old red sandstone of the English*. (Bulletin Soc. Geol. de France, tome ix. p. 84.)
   In 1838, M. Dumont visited England for the purpose of examining the Silurian region, and on his return to Belgium he laid before the Royal Academy of Brussels a comparative lablef of the Belgian and Silurian formations. This document differs from Dr. Buckland’s table only in drawing more closely the terms of comparison—in identifying the two upper divisions of the terrain ardoisier with the Cambrian system—and in omitting all reference to the Plymouth limestone. The old red sandstone of England is considered to have no equivalent in Belgium. In the Report which accompanies this table, M. Dumont remarks on the perfect accordance in the structure of the two regions, but he says that in Belgium the calcaire inferieur is most strongly developed, and in Siluria the schists and psammites. He doubts if there be any representative of the old red sandstone in Belgium. If it be wanting, he says, its place is marked between the systbnc quartzo-schisleux superieur and the systeme calcareux superieur; but if it exists, it ought to be regarded as an extraordinary development of the superior psammite of the quartzo-schisteux superieur or upper Ludlow rock. The fossils considered as characteristic of the divisions of the Silurian system in England, he is of opinion are good for this country, but that differences more or less marked ought to occur in other countries, and that such actually exist in Belgium.
   In M. Dumont’s work, justly valued for unravelling the structure of an intricate country, for its minute mineralogical and local details, and for its excellent map, lists of fossils are appended to each system. On an inspection of them, it was impossible not to be struck with the great proportionate number of mountain-limestone or Devonshire fossils, and the few solely Silurian. In briefly remarking on their contents, I will take the lists in a descending order, for the sake of departing from the systeme calcareux supe'rieur, which is clearly proved to belong to the carboniferous series by containing 38 well- known English mountain-limestone species.
 Of the ten shells specifically determined, from the systbne quartzo-schisteux superieur, namely, Spirifera attenuata, S. bisulcata, S. lineata, S. pinguis, Producta aculeata, Strophomena pileopsis, Pecten plicatus, Terebratula aspera, T. JVilsoni, and T. lineata, Five—Spirifera bisulcata, S. pinguis, Producta aculeata, Strophomena pileopsis, and Terebratula lineata, are also mountain-limestone species ;  One—Pecten plicatus, is believed to occur both in the mountain-limestone and Devonian strata ;
  One—Spirifera attenuata, is peculiar to the Devonian series;   One—Terebratula aspera, is common to the Devonian and Silurian beds ; Two—Spirifera lineata and Terebratula JVilsoni, are true Silurian fossils, if the identification be right; but the characters of the latter frequently lead to erroneous determinations.
 In the systeme calcareux inferieur five species of shells are specifically mentioned with references, and ten of corals.
   The shells are, Spirifera attenuata, Terebratula prisca, T. aspera, T. explanata, and Spirifera lineata. The first is probably the shell peculiar to the Devonian series, but if it be correctly identified it is a mountain limestone species. Terebratula prisca and T. aspera are found, as already stated, both in the Silurian and Devonian series ; Terebratula explanata is generally considered a variety of T. prisca, and Spirifera lineata is given with a doubt.
   The ten species of corals are, Fenestella (Retepora) antiqua, Anthophyllum bicostatum, Cyathophyllum dianthus, C. quadrigeminum, (including Manon favosum, see Goldfuss, corrigenda, vol. i.,) C. ceespitosum, Strombodes (C.) plicatus, Astrea (C.) ananas, A. (C.)pentagona, Favosites (Calamopora) spon- gites, and F. (C.) polymorpha.
  
Two of the species—Astrea pentagona and Cyalhophyllum quadrigeminum, have been noticed in England only in the Devonian series.
Four—Fenestella antiqua, Favo siles polymorpha, F. spongites, and Cyalhophyllum ccespitosum, are common to the Devonian and Silurian systems.
Three—Strombodes plicatus, Cyathophyllum dianlhus, Astrea ananas, have hitherto been obtained in England only in the Silurian formations ; but it is possible that the S.plicatus may be the Astrea (Cijathophyllum) helianlhoides, a Devonian and not a Silurian coral.
   The Anlhophyllum bicostalum has not been noticed in England.
  A summary of these details gives twenty-five fossils, only five of which can be said to be peculiar to the Silurian system, viz. Astrea (Cyathophyllum) ananas, Strombodes plicatus, Cyathophyllum dianthus, Terebratula JVilsoni, and Spirifera lineata ? but the Terebratula is probably not an accurate identification ; and the Spirifera is given by M. Dumont with a doubt*.
  The lists which I have ventured to analyse are small, but the evidence they afford is valuable, consisting not in the absence of characteristic suites of peculiarly Silurian fossils, but in the presence of Devonian and carboniferous species, which have not been detected in any of the Silurian beds. If it should be objected that an attempt has been made to establish a case by lists and not by specimens, it may be replied that the lists bear all the internal evidence of having been carefully prepared. They contain no species which may be considered as apocryphal, and they possess a unity of character with lists from other localities in the same country, drawn up by independent observers. It should also be remembered that M. Dumont’s judgement w hile preparing the lists could not have been biased by any theory ; for he had none to advocate. His sole object in examining the country around Liege was to work out a difficult district, and to prove the order of superposition of strata strangely contorted and inverted. This task it must be universally allowed, he accomplished in a manner deserving of all praise. At that time, he thought not of identifying his systems with those of England; and if it should be proved that the comparison is erroneous, the failure must be solely ascribed to not taking into his consideration the only means by which distant countries can be identified, a right application of organic remains. There can be no doubt also, that M. Dumont was guided, to a great extent, in his classification of 1838, by having determined in 1836, that the systeme calcareux inferieur was the equivalent of the Eifel limestone. (See Bull. Soc. Geol. de France, t. viii. p. 77. Dec. 1836.)
   I am called upon to offer a few remarks on one other case.
   During the Reunion extraordinaire of the Geological Society of France, at Porrentruy, in September 1838, M. de Verneuil read a notice on the ancient formations of the Bas Boulonnais, which he had visited during- the preceding summer, in company with MM. d’Omalius d’Halloy and Dumont, previously to a joint excursion to England. The principal object of the paper was to establish the existence of two limestones, one the equivalent of the mountain-limestone of England, and the other of the Wenlock, M. de Ver- neuil having been led to suppose that there existed in the Bas Boulonnais a true Silurian district, in consequence of the examination of a collection of fossils sent to him, the preceding autumn, by M. d’Archiac. This limestone M. de Verneuil also placed on a parallel with the systbne calcareux in- /mewr, of M. Dumont and of the limestone of the Eifel. (Bulletin Soc. Geol. de France, tome ix. pp. 388, 389 ; 1838.)
   M. Dumont, in the Report made to the Bruxelles Academy in 1838, likewise states, that his four systemes anthraxifbres of Belgium are found in the Boulonnais. 
   M. Rozet had previously (1828) pointed out the existence of two limestones, the upper of which he placed on the parallel of the mountain-limestone, and the lower or black beneath the old red sandstone, which he stated was wanting in the Boulonnais; but in his memoir on the Ardennes and Belgium he considers them as two divisions (stages) of the same formation, and assigns them a position above the old red sandstone. (Description Geologique du Bas Boulonnais, pp. 99, 117, 1828; Annales des Sciences Naturelles, tome xix. p. 145, 1830.)
   It is not necessary to offer any remarks on the proofs of the existence of the mountain-limestone, for it has been long known to occur in the Bas Boulonnais.
   The evidence in support of the presence of an equivalent of the Wenlock limestone rests partly on infraposition, and partly on certain fossils, stated to he common to the Boulonnais, Dudley, Wenlock, the Eifel, and Belgium. (Bull. Soc. Geol. de France, tome. ix. p. 392.)
   At the Reunion extraordinaire of the French Society at Boulogne in September last (1839), and at which some of the Fellows of this Society assisted, M. de Verneuil’s views with respect to that limestone were fully admitted. When, however, doubts arose at the commencement of this year relative to the age of the Belgian systemes, Mr. Murchison suggested to me, that the Boulonnais beds would prove to be of the equivalents of the Devonian. It is necessary to state, that Mr. Murchison attended the meeting of the French Society. To determine the question, if possible, by the aid of organic remains, that gentleman procured, by the kind assistance of INI. Dutertre-Yvart, a collection of specimens in the Boulogne Museum. 1 have had the pleasure of examining it, and comparing its contents with the list drawn up by M. de Archiac and M. de Verneuil, and published in the French Bulletin.
   The following are the results obtained from both sources of information ; and I beg to add, that the list just mentioned was evidently prepared with the utmost care and scrupulous attention to the characters of the fossils, and without the least appearance of bias to preconceived opinions. The amount of species is twenty. 
  The distribution of the twenty species contained in the above list, is as follows :—
   One,—Orthis umbraculum, is also a mountain-limestone shell.
Five,—Strombodes vermicularis, Terehratula concentrica, Spirifera attenuata (not the mountain- limestone shell), Terebra Hennahii, and Euomphalus radiatus, are true Devonian fossils.
Seven,—Fenestella antiqua, Favosites polymorpha, F. spongites, Cyathophyllum turbinatum, C. ccespitosum, Terehratula prisca, and T. aspera, occur both in the Devonian and Silurian systems.
Two,—Aulopora tuhceformis and Astrea ananas, have not yet been seen by me in the Devonshire collections.
  The Orthis transversalis is distinct from the Leptcena transversalis of the Silurian system, and the Terehratula plicatella is believed to lie distinct from the Terehratula borealis of the same system.
  The Producta aculeata (P. subacuta, De Yerneuil), Serpula omphaloides, and Orthis similis, have not yet been noticed by me in England.
  The inference which 1 think may be drawn from the above enumeration is, that there exists in the Boulonnais a series of beds characterized by a suite of fossils intermediate between that of the Silurian system and that of the mountain-limestone, or on a parallel with the old red sandstone.
  The preceding remarks partake too much, I fear, of the tone of personal advocacy; but it was my duty to show what share I have had in the development of the Devonian or old red system. How small my share is, I need not say—how large that of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison, will soon be known to all.
  

