IN a communication formerly made, I gave a short notice on the Alabama coal-fields; I now propose to say something, but very briefly, of the newer deposits of the South, the post-pliocene and tertiary, so far as I have examined them in my present tour.
  First, in regard to the post-pliocene occupying the coast and the lowest lands for some leagues inland in Georgia, the marine shells contained in deposits of clay and sand differ in no way from those of the adjoining sea. They are found arranged in groups, littoral and pelagic, as now on or near the shore. Such is observed to be the case in the island of Skiddaway, which is part of the delta of the Savannah river, and in the country between the mouth of the Alatamaha and the Turtle river in Glynn county, Georgia. These marine sandy deposits resemble exactly those which must be now forming off the neighbouring coast, and are covered in some spots by dark-coloured clay containing the remains of quadrupeds of extinct species, the Megatherium, Mylodon, Mastodon giganteus, Elephasprimigenius, the Horse and others, with a large Chelonian. I visited numerous localities on the Brunswick canal, near Darien, in company with Mr. Hamilton Couper, to whom we owe the discovery and careful exhumation of these remains, nearly all of which he has munificently presented to several public museums in the United States, especially those of Washington and Philadelphia. Everywhere I observed that there is no intermixture of the deposit containing the land animals with the subjacent bed containing the marine shells, and the mammalian remains appear to me to have been deposited in one of the arms of the ancient delta of the Alatamaha, when the relative level of land and sea was not the same, and yet differed but slightly from the present.
  Mr. Couper’s collection of the fossil shells underlying thé bones comprises a large proportion of all the species which have been found on the coast of South Carolina, Georgia and Alabama. I have myself seen most of these fossils in situ, near Savannah or in the excavations made for the Brunswick canal, and they establish the fact that the ocean was inhabited before the time of the extinct mammalia by precisely the same conchological fauna as now : nor ought this conclusion to surprise us, as it is quite in harmony with that which I formerly deduced from the association in all parts of North America, from Canada to South Carolina, of the bones of the Mastodon and other lost quadrupeds with freshwater and land shells, not differing specifically from those of the adjoining rivers, lakes and forests. Such facts seem distinctly to imply that the temperature both of the atmosphere and the ocean has not materially changed since the time of the lost quadrupeds.
  Secondly, on the coast of Georgia I examined, with Mr. H. Couper, the position of those submerged trunks or stools of the cypress which Bartram formerly alluded to in his ‘Travels,’ as showing that the level of the land on this coast had changed relatively to the sea in modern times. These trees can only grow in freshwater swamps, and there they are not permanently submerged at their base even in fresh water. At the mouth of the Alatamaha they are now found below the level of high tide in the salt marshes, with a deposit of mud over them. They also occur all with their upper surfaces cut off at the same level, and covered with several feet of alluvial matter in swamps higher up than the line of brackish water. They are so placed as to show a vertical depression of the land to the amount of at least four feet. But a full explanation of the curious appearances presented by them would require diagrams and a more detailed description than I have now time to send.
  Thirdly, on the shores of the Bay of Mobile which opens into the Gulf of Mexico, I first met with inland deposits of that bivalve shell called Gnathodon cuneatus, an inhabitant of brackish water, but now met with in banks of sand extending several miles above the influence of the salt water, and rising three or four feet above the height of the present tides. Mr. Conrad first directed my attention to this remarkable formation, and I was taken to see it at several places by the Rev. Mr. Hamilton at the mouth of the Alabama river and in the suburbs of the city of Mobile. In neither of these localities, where large and small individuals of the Gnathodon form dense, shelly masses, could I detect any intermixture of other shells; yet on examining the mud of the adjoining sea-shore at low water, about a mile west of the embouchure of the Alabama, I met not only with the Gnathodon abounding in a living state in the mud, but also with a Nerita, and occasionally shells of Cyrena carolinmsis. I tasted the water here and found it perfectly fresh, but was assured that this was owing to the wind blowing off the shore, and that the same testacea cannot live in water permanently fresh. The Gnathodon is not known to exist at present at the mouth of any American river farther north than the Alabama. The accumulation of fossils is far too considerable and extensive to be referred to the Indians, who are supposed by some observers to have used them for food, and to have left the shells scattered over the ground. On the other hand, the facts above stated may perhaps be explained without assuming that there has been an upheaval of the coast since the brackish waters of the Gulf of Mexico were inhabited by the Gnathodon. It is possible that the action of the waves on the shore may have thrown up these shells in the form of sea-beaches.
  Fourthly, I have not fallen in with any deposits of miocene shells in the course of my present tour in Georgia and Alabama. The most southern point where I know them to occur is South Carolina. Dr. Gibbes of Charleston showed me a large number of miocene fossils obtained by him and Mr. Tuomey on the banks of Goose Creek, near the mouth of the Cooper river, at a place not visited by me in 1842.
  Fifthly, the eocene formations are of great thickness, and occupy an extensive area in Georgia and Alabama. I formerly described in the Society's ‘ Proceedings ’ and ‘ Journal ’ the two formations of this age which I saw in 1841-42 in South Carolina and Georgia, the one chiefly calcareous, consisting of white limestone and marl, the other the burr-stone formation, composed principally of clay and sand; and I showed in a diagram representing a natural section at Jacksonboro’, Georgia, the manner in which these different members of the Eocene series, both horizontally stratified, rest one upon the other. My examination of the cuttings recently made for a railway about 200 miles in length between Savannah and Macon in Georgia, in a line parallel to the section which I formerly observed in the bluffs of the Savannah river, has confirmed the opinions before expressed by me, namely, 1st, that the clays and sands containing the burr-stone are eocene, as shown by casts of testacea and corals; 2ndly, that they overlie the calcareous eocene limestone and white marl. In like manner I have found throughout Alabama that the lower tertiary deposits in which the calcareous strata predominate are horizontal, with a very undulating or uneven surface, and have been covered by newer beds, also horizontal, of blood-red clay, silt, quartz gravel, white porcelain earth, yellow ochreous clay, and white, pink and yellow siliceous sands and ferruginous sandstone. Chert occurs in some places in this upper deposit, which is so barren of organic remains in Alabama, that I could only infer its eocene date from the analogy of Georgia. The older eocene limestone and marl must have had a very uneven surface, shaped into hills and valleys, often bounded by steep precipices, before the incumbent clay and sand, which is occasionally from 300 to 400 feet thick, was thrown down. When the original inequalities had been for the most part removed by the deposition of the argillaceous and sandy beds, the existing ravines and valleys were excavated at the expense of both formations, and hence it occasionally happens that two closely adjoining sections, each on the same level and of the same height, exhibit a distinct series of horizontal beds. This diversity is exemplified in different parts of the bluff at Claiborne on the Alabama river, which has become celebrated for the great number of perfect fossil shells obtained from it by Messrs. Conrad and Lea. At the new landing, the perpendicular precipice exhibits more than 150 feet of the calcareous formation, chiefly composed of white limestone and marl, while the red clay and sand appear only at the top of the cliff about twenty feet thick. But this upper formation, about a mile lower down in the same bluff at Claiborne, is more than 100 feet thick, composed of sand and clay without fossils, a small portion only of the calcareous beds cropping out from beneath.
  Sixthly, owing to the extent and thickness of the overlying clay and sand, it is often impossible to obtain a clear section of the various subdivisions of the eocene white limestone of Alabama. To this cause I attribute the obscurity in which the true age of the nummulite limestone of Alabama has hitherto been involved. It has been considered sometimes as an upper cretaceous group, sometimes as intermediate in age between the tertiary and secondary series. After visiting Claiborne and the country on the other side of the Alabama river in the fork of that river and the Tombecbee, passing by Suggsville, Macon, Clarksville and Creagh’s, all in Clarke county, I am persuaded that the nummulite limestone is an eocene rock, newer than all the beds of the well-known Claiborne bluff. It is in fact more modern than the sandy deposit from which the eocene shells described in the publications of Messrs. Conrad and Lea were derived. The annexed section will explain my view of the structure of this country better than a detailed description.
  I am informed by Captain Bingham the engineer, that some of the hills between Clarksville and Creagh’s, on the tops of which I observed the nummulite limestone, are about 400 feet higher than the top of the bluff at Claiborne.
  Seventhly, the conclusion last-stated will make it necessary in future to omit from all lists of American cretaceous fossils such species of shells as have been considered secondary, simply on the ground of their occurrence in the nummulite limestone of Alabama. The fossils which I have met with most abundantly in the latter are the Nummulites Mantelli and Pecten Poulsoni. I have however many others, especially casts of shells and corals, which 1 shall hereafter describe. The nummulitic formation is from 50 to 100 feet in thickness, consisting for the most part of a soft cream- coloured stone, hardening on exposure, while in other beds it is highly indurated. In its lower portion, where it joins the ordinary white limestone, I found Pecten perplanus, Ostrea panda and Pla- giostoma dumosum. Lunulites and other corals also occur in this rock. The recognition of the true place of this limestone in the series will remove almost every fossil from the list of those species which were still supposed to be common to the cretaceous and tertiary groups of the United States.
  Eighthly, I have visited several of the principal localities where the bones of that gigantic cetacean, called Basilosaurus by Dr. Harlan and Zeuglodon by Mr..Owen, have been discovered in Clarke county before-mentioned. These bones are everywhere in the same geological position, namely in the eocene white limestone, below the level of the nummulitic rock and above the beds which contain the greater number of perfectly preserved eocene shells, such as Cardita planicosta and others.
  Ninthly, on Creagh’s plantation and about four miles and a half S.W. from Clarksville, I visited the spot where Mr. Koch procured in 1845 the head and part of the vertebral column, about thirty feet in length, of the Zeuglodon, called by him Hydrarchos. I was accompanied by Mr. William Pickett, a gentleman who also assisted Mr. Koch in the exhumation of those bones. From him and other persons I learn that the main body of the vertebrae which entered into the skeleton exhibited in the United States by Mr. Koch in 1845 under the name of Hydrarchos were procured in Washington county, Alabama, at a place fifteen miles distant in a direct line from the locality where the head was dug up.
  1 have information of about forty other places where separate bones of this huge animal have been met with in Clarke and Washington counties alone. From several of these I have seen the bones, and they are in so perfect a condition and so bulky, so distant the one from the other, and must have been so difficult to transport, that I can hardly doubt their having belonged to forty distinct individuals. The Hippopotamus and Sus were formerly enumerated by Mr. Cooper and Dr. Harlan in their list of the fossil genera met with in digging the Brunswick canal. But Prof. Owen, in a communication recently sent to the Academy of Sciences at Philadelphia, has shown that the tusk referred to the Hippopotamus belongs to the Mastodon, so that there is now no evidence of a fossil Hippopotamus in America. The jaw to which the name of Sus americana had been applied exhibits a new type of organization, making some approach both to Lophiodou and Toxodon, but differing from either. For this fossil Mr. Owen has proposed the name of Harlanus americanus.

  
