IN the course of last year I visited several parts of the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and examined the tertiary deposits there called "crag," principally with a view of satisfying myself respecting the following points:—First, the direct superposition of the red to the coralline crag, as first pointed out in 1835, by Mr. Charlesworth;  Secondly, whether the remains of Mammalia were really imbedded in regular and undisturbed marine strata in the Norwich crag, as affirmed by the writer above mentioned; Thirdly, whether the proportion of recent shells, as compared with the extinct, was decidedly larger in the Norwich crag, so as to indicate a posteriority in age relatively to the Suffolk crag.
Red Crag of Suffolk overlies Coralline.—First, in regard to the superposition of the red to the coralline crag, I found this fact exhibited in distinct sections at Ramsholt and Tattingstone, as indicated by Mr. Charlesworth, and in quarries near Sudburn, to which I was directed by Mr. Bunbury. In both the former localities,—Tattingstone and Ramsholt,—the red crag rests on the denuded surface of the older or coralline deposit.
  At Sutton, near Woodbridge, in Suffolk, a large excavation has been made at the point of junction; and Mr. W. Colchester, a zealous collector of the fossils of these beds, had the kindness to cause an artificial section to be made, expressly to enable me to see more distinctly the manner of the junction of the two deposits, which is sufficiently remarkable.— The older or coralline mass is chiefly composed of comminuted shells and zoophytes, the calcareous sand thus constituted being divided by thin horizontal layers or flags of impure limestone, which however are not continuous. It is evident that the calcareous sand had acquired a certain degree of consistency at the bottom of the sea, before the red crag was thrown down, for it is seen to have been perforated by numerous Pholades, the tortuous holes of which descend six or eight feet below the top of the coralline crag, and still contain the shells of the Pholas, while the remainder of the cylindrical hollow has been filled with differently-coloured sand derived from the superincumbent deposit. There is also another proof of the inferior mass having obtained a certain degree of consolidation before it was denuded. The loose upper crag at Sutton does not rest everywhere on a level foundation of subjacent coralline crag, but abuts abruptly against a vertical wall or cliff of the older formation, as shown in the annexed diagram (fig. 39). This buried cliff, eight or ten feet high, may be traced at Sutton, running in a direction N.E. and S.W., and in some spots may be seen slightly overhanging. In consequence of this circumstance, a deceptive appearance of distinct alternations of red and coralline crag is often produced, when a vertical section, parallel to the line of junction, is laid open. Even where the buried precipice of coralline crag has not been perpendicular, but merely having a very steep slope, an artificial cut at a high inclination may so intersect alternately the red and coralline crag, as to lead to the conclusion which I first entertained at Sutton, of a real intercalation of the two formations. Some of the apparent anomalies seen in like manner in the stratification of the red crag, may sometimes be ascribed to the deposition, on the steep sloping sides of submarine sand-banks, of new matter of a different colour and composition. When these are afterwards cut through in the steep slope of a seacliff, we occasionally see patches of the more modern bed adhering like plaster to the face of the older one. At Tattingstone, in Suffolk, the inferior or coralline crag consists chiefly of greenish marl, with only a few stony beds. Here the number of corals is so small, and the shells for the most part are so comminuted, that the distinctness of the inferior mass from the red crag is far less striking than on the north of the river Deben. I caused a pit about seven feet deep to be sunk in the yard at Tattingstone Hall farm, piercing the lowest part there exposed of the coralline crag, through green marls, with intervening layers of flaggy limestone, two or three inches thick. At the bottom of this pit I found marl of the same character, containing a large Nucula, Venus ovata, and some other shells; when the workmen were stopped by the quantity of water which flowed in. One of the flaggy beds of limestone was almost of a brick red colour, and consisted chiefly of comminuted shells, like the green marl.
Although the upper crag at the point of junction is here (at Tattingstone) very like the lower formation, yet we can recognise it by the presence of Fusus contrarius, Turritella terebra, and other shells which are wholly wanting in the lower bed.
  Fluvio-marine Crag of Southicold, Sfc.—Before offering any general remarks upon the fossils of the coralline and red crag, I shall pass on to the consideration of the crag of Norwich, or "mammaliferous crag" as it has been termed by Mr. Charlesworth, which is the principal object of this paper.— By examining this crag in the neighbourhood of Southwold and Norwich, I soon satisfied myself that instead of being of purely marine origin, like the deposits already alluded to, it is a fluvio-marine formation, containing everywhere an intermixture of land, fresh-water, and sea shells, with the bones of Mammalia and fish. I first examined this crag at Thorpe, near Aldborough, where it extends to the sea-coast. I did not observe its junction with the subjacent coralline crag, but was informed by Capt. Alexander that the latter crops out from beneath it upon the beach, where it is exposed for 200 yards at low water, being there called the " Thorpe rocks," which are broken up for building stone. Sizewell gap, several miles to the north, is the most northern point to which the the coralline crag has yet been traced. But it is at Southwold, about ten miles north of Thorpe, that the Norwich or fluviomarine crag is most largely developed. It may there be studied both in a continuous line of sea-cliff, and in several large pits scattered through the interior. It is very variable in mineral composition, consisting of sand, shingle, loam, and laminated clay in regular strata, some of which bear marks of very tranquil deposition. A thickness of about forty feet is sometimes exposed in one section, as in the cliff at Easton Bavant, about three quarters of a mile N.E. of Southwold.— The marine shells are here spread through a thickness of ten and sometimes fifteen feet, chiefly in the lowest part of the deposit here laid open. Some of the bivalves, as the Nucula Cobboldice, Tellina obliqua, and Mya arenaria, have both valves united, and have not suffered by attrition, although associated, not only with land and freshwater shells, but with rolled fish-bones, and the bones and teeth of Mammalia, as of the elephant, rhinoceros, horse and deer. Capt. Alexander, whom I was so fortunate as to have as my guide, informed me that in one bed at the base of the cliff, which is most rich in marine shells, and which is only from four to six inches thick, he found the tooth of a horse, buried with sand, in the mouth of a large specimen of the Fusus striatus. I learnt from the same gentleman, that the bones of Mammalia are frequently met with in the same bed as those of fish, marine shells, and Crustacea; and in more than one instance I was enabled myself to verify this fact. He also showed me the tooth of a Mastodon, washed out of the cliffs between Dunwich and Sizewell, which may, without hesitation, be referred to the same formation.
  In tracing the fluvio-marine deposit from the cliffs of Easton Bavant to the northward, in the direction of Kessingland, I found distinct layers of flinty shingle regularly interposed between the shelly beds, so that I have no hesitation in referring to the Norwich crag those strata of sand and shingle on this coast, which so much resemble the sandy portions of the plastic clay of the London and Hampshire basins.
  I examined, with Capt. Alexander for my guide, several inland pits of Norwich crag near Southwold; and in one of these in the parish of Henham, on the property of Lord Stradbrooke, I picked up mammiferous bones and teeth, from an undisturbed bed containing marine, freshwater, and terrestrial shells. Among the freshwater shells I found a species of Cyrena, which appears to be one of the varieties of that variable species, Cyr. trigonula, found at Grays in Essex, and elsewhere. In each of the different localities of this neighbourhood, as in those of the red crag of Suffolk, some shells are found which are not met with at other spots; the whole assemblage, however, agrees very closely with that derived from the pits around Norwich, to the consideration of which I shall now pass.
  Crag near Norwich.—The crag of the neighbourhood of Norwich is interposed, in patches of variable thickness, between the chalk, on which it rests, and a dense bed of gravel by which it is almost everywhere covered. It is only in some valleys, like that of the Yare, where denudation has extended down to the fundamental chalk, that the crag is partially exposed at the surface.
The various excavations made for chalk and sand at Bramerton and Whitlingham, on the right bank of the Yare, and at Thorpe and Postwick, on the left bank, places within four or five miles of Norwich, all agree in presenting beds of sand, loam, and gravel, in which we observe a mixture of marine, land, and freshwater shells, with ichthyolites and bones of Mammalia. It is clear that these beds have been accumulated by successive deposition at the bottom of the sea, near the mouth of a river. Mr. Woodward, in his account of the Norfolk crag, has described the drilled surface of the chalk at Postwick, showing that it had remained for some time exposed to the action of marine perforating animals, before the crag was thrown down: and similar facts were pointed out to me by the Rev. Thomas Clowes, of Yarmouth, respecting the chalk at Whitlingham. That gentleman presented me with a fragment of chalk, perforated to the depth of several inches by the Pholas crispata, the shell still remaining at the bottom of its cylindrical cavity, the upper part of which was filled with loose sand, which had fallen in from the incumbent crag. The chalk of this place when bored by the Pholas, was either exposed in the bed of the tertiary sea, or at least was not yet covered by a considerable thickness of sand and loam.
Among other observations which prove the gradual deposition of the tertiary strata themselves, I may mention that Capt. Alexander found the tusk of an elephant at Bramerton, to which there were many Serpula attached; a fact which also demonstrates, together with many others, that the bones of quadrupeds were really washed down into the sea of the Norwich crag, and were not introduced afterwards by diluvial action, as has been sometimes suspected.
Although many freshwater shells have, by dint of careful search, been detected in the Norwich beds, they are nevertheless rare in comparison with the marine Testacea, and the terrestrial species are still more rare. Mr. J. B. Wigham however informs me, that in one of the beds at Thorpe, near Norwich, there is a great predominance of freshwater shells, most of which cannot be preserved, as they fall to powder on being exposed to the air. Tn the pits of Thorpe last mentioned, the same gentleman found the tooth of a Mastodon in the bottom of the deposit, near the chalk, together with pectens and other marine shells. He also discovered, in 1838, at Postwick, together with the remains of fish, and marine shells, the left side of the upper jaw of a Mastodon, containing the second true molar, and in the socket the indication of another, namely, the first molar. This fragment was sufficiently perfect to enable Mr. Owen, to whom I submitted it, to refer it to Mastodon longirostris, a species also found at Eppelsheim. With these remains of a huge pachyderm were associated the teeth and jaw of a field-mouse, larger and with stronger teeth than the common species, (Arvicola arvalis, Cuv.). These fossils were accompanied also by the bones of birds, together with remains of several fish, such as the Platax and Myliobates. The horns of stags, together with bones and teeth of the horse, pig, elephant, and other quadrupeds, have also been detected at Postwick, Thorpe, Bramerton, and other localities of crag near Norwich. The association here, as in so many other places, both in Europe and America, of the remains of the Mastodon and horse, is remarked by Mr. Owen as a subject not without interest.
  In addition to spots bordering the valley of the Yare, near Norwich, I visited several others, such as Belaugh and Wroxham, to the north of Norwich, and between that city and Horstead. In all these I found the same kind of crag interposed between the superficial gravel and the chalk; the shells consisting for the most part of Fusus striatum, Turritella terebra, Cerithium punctatum, Pectuncitlus variabilis, Tellina obliqua, Tel. calcarea, Cardium edule, and Cyprina vulgaris. 
  Proportion of recent shells in Norwich Crag.—The information which I was most desirous of obtaining respecting the Norwich crag generally, was the degree of the resemblance of its shells to those of the Suffolk crag on the one hand, and to those of the existing seas on the other. In accomplishing one part of this object, I have been particularly indebted to Mr. J. B. Wigham, of Norwich, whose labours alone have nearly doubled the number of shells which had been previously obtained from this formation, and who has most liberally placed his entire collection at my disposal. I have also to acknowledge the assistance of Mr. Fitch, of Norwich. I received moreover many shells of the Southwold strata through the kindness of Capt. Alexander, several of them belonging to species not yet discovered near Norwich.
But it would have been impossible for me to compare the Norwich shells, amounting to 111 in number, with those of the Suffolk crag, had I not obtained the kind assistance of Mr. Searles Wood, with opportunity of referring to his extensive collection. Nor would Mr. Wood and I have been able to institute a thorough comparison of these shells with recent species, if we had not been assisted by Mr. George Sowerby. The number of shells of the Norfolk crag known in 1833, when Woodward published his list, amounted, according to that author, to 85 species; but so many of these consisted of mere varieties and monstrosities of a few of the commonest species, especially Littorina, Fusus, and Purpura, that we have found it necessary to reduce the 85 species, as named in that list, to about 58, and several even of this number must again be excluded from a genuine list of Norfolk crag shells, on the ground of their consisting of fragments, probably washed in from pre-existing beds of the red or Suffolk crag. The total number known in 1833 being thus brought down to less than 60, has been again nearly doubled by the additions recently made, especially by Mr. Wigham, 19 out of 111 consisting of land and freshwater shells.
  It will naturally be thought that the total number is very small, whether as compared to the shells of the British seas, or to the Fauna of the Suffolk crag, especially when it is considered that the scantiness of this number is not owing to any want of industry on the part of collectors, nor to any paucity of individual shells. But I have already stated that the deposit has a fluvio-marine character, and it is well known that in brackish water, like the Baltic, or in any great estuary, the variety of species is far less considerable than in the salt sea, latitude, climate, and other conditions being the same. A similar scantiness in the list of species has been remarked in those tertiary formations which extend along the valley of the Rhine, from Basle to Mayence, and in which great numbers of land and freshwater shells are intermingled with marine species, the same strata including also the bones of Mammalia, and among others, at Eppelsheim, of the Dinotherium and Mastodon longirostris. 
  Of the 92 marine shells of the Norwich crag, Mr. Wood has recognized 73 as common to the red crag. This enormous proportion of species common to both (about 78 per cent.), struck me so forcibly when collecting at Southwold and Norwich, that 1 at first began to suspect, that by increasing our knowledge of the fossils of the Norwich beds we should eventually prove them and the red crag to be nearly, if not wholly of the same age. But the application of another test, namely, the per-centage of recent species, soon led to a very different result, for both in the marine and freshwater shells of the Norwich crag, we have found between 50 and 60 per cent. of recent species, and those almost exclusively northern, and nearly all British shells; whereas in the red crag, as I shall afterwards more fully explain, there are only 30 per cent., and in the coralline crag only 19 per cent., of recent species of true Mollusca. 
That the crag of Norwich was newer than that of the red crag of Suffolk, had been already implied by Mr. Charlesworth when he suggested that shells of the former had probably been washed into the Norwich beds; and both he and Mr. Wood had recognized in the assemblage of Norfolk shells, a nearer approach to the existing British Fauna; but it is most satisfactory to have these conjectures borne out by a detailed examination of the Norfolk and Suffolk shells, a task, in the execution of which Mr. Wood and myself have had throughout the assistance of Mr. George Sowerby, without whose experience and knowledge of the living shells, we could not have arrived at such positive conclusions.
Only two species of freshwater shells have been hitherto found in the red crag of Suffolk, and these Mr. Wood collected at Sutton, namely, three individuals of Auricula myosotis, and a single specimen of Planorbis marginatus, belonging to that variety in which the keel is slightly prominent.— This same variety of Planorbis, as well as the Auricula, have both been discovered in the Norwich crag. Amongst the other freshwater species in this crag, I may mention Cyrena trigonula, which occurs both at Southwold, and at Crostwick near Norwich. The land shells consist of Helix hispida and H. plebeium, common British shells, and two perfect specimens of a Helix found by Capt. Alexander at Southwold, which bears a very near resemblance to the Helix turonensis, so common in the faluns of Touraine. Of the 92 marine shells all, with two or three exceptions, are either species found in the red crag, or now living, so that a very small number seem to have been peculiar to this period.
The most difficult point to determine in respect to the fossils of the Norwich crag, is the propriety of excluding certain species on the ground of their having been probably washed in from an older bed. The mere circumstance of shells being common to the red crag, and, at the same time, of extinct species, raises in itself no fair presumption against their belonging to the period of the Norwich beds. For some of the commonest shells, such as Mya lata, Tellina obliqua, Astarte plana, Tellina pretenuis, Nucula Cobboldia, Auricula pyramidalis, and some others, are extinct species, and found also in the red crag of Suffolk: yet no one can doubt that these lived in the sea of the Norwich crag, as they abound in it in a good state of preservation, although some of them are fragile shells, and the Acephala have occasionally both valves united. Nor have they in general the red ferruginous colour by which the fossils of the upper crag of Suffolk are tinged. I may however remark, that the fossils of the Norwich crag have also, in some places, acquired a yellow ochreous colour, so that the presence of this character does not at once stamp a shell as having been derived from the more ancient bed. When there is only evidence of a few fragments of a remarkable shell, such as Hi unites Dubuissoni, or when I have only met with one bouldered specimen, as of Murex alveolatus, and that stained red, I have rejected them as spurious without hesitation.— The greater number of specimens of the Fusus contrarius which are broken or bouldered, may also doubtless be referable to the same source. This last point however is one of minor importance, as a conchologist may satisfy himself, by referring to an extensive series, such as Mr. Wood possesses, that the Fusus contrarius is merely a sinistral variety of Fits, striatus, a fossil which properly belongs to the Norwich crag, and of which Capt. Alexander posseses a reversed specimen from Bramerton, of the ordinary striated variety with angular whorls. The individual last mentioned is quite perfect, and free from ferruginous stains.
  No species of Terebratula was enumerated in Woodward's list of the Norfolk crag shells, although the species allied to, if not identical with, Ter. psittacea, is by no means rare. On the other hand, Woodward mentions Ter. plicatilis as being washed out from the chalk into the crag. Mr. Charlesworth also has spoken of various species of Terebratula, and other chalk fossils, as of frequent occurrence in the crag of Norfolk. I collected many Terebratula, of the recent species before mentioned, without ever happening to meet with any derived from the chalk, the introduction of which therefore appears to me to have been a local accident.
  It becomes a question of greater delicacy and difficulty when only one entire specimen, or a small number of broken specimens, of a well-known shell of the red or coralline crag have been met with. In this predicament the following ten species appear to stand at present.
To exclude all these because of their extreme rarity, would, I think, be somewhat rash, because we have as yet only solitary examples of some other species which are either quite peculiar to the Norwich beds, or are recent species never found in the red crag. Nevertheless, it is worthy of remark, that if we reduce the list of marine shells by ten, on the ground of doubts entertained respecting the authenticity of the species above enumerated, we then find nearly the same percentage of recent species in the marine list as is obtained from that comprising the land and freshwater shells, namely, 60 per cent. In regard to the nineteen land and freshwater shells, there is no possibility of any individual having been washed in from the purely marine crag of Suffolk; so that when we have obtained a large number of these, they will yield the safest test of the analogy of the Fauna to that now existing.
  Norwich Crag Older Pleiocene.—To whatever view we may at present incline respecting some of these doubtful shells, the Norwich crag will still be referable to some part of the older pleiocene period, according to the classification which I have adopted in the 'Principles of Geology,' while the red and coralline crag of Suffolk will each belong to different parts of the miocene epoch.
  It would be foreign to the chief object of the present paper if I were to enter into any details respecting the fossil shells of the red and coralline crag, the examination of which could not have been accomplished without access to Mr. Wood's collection, where almost every species is illustrated by abundance of individuals. Assisted by Mr. George Sowerby and Mr. Wood, T have convinced myself that out of 345 species of coralline crag shells, 67 are identical with recent species, being about 19 per cent.; while out of 230 species from the red crag, 69 agree with living species, being in the proportion of about 30 per cent.
  It is curious that a large proportion of the recent shells found in the coralline crag, are neither met with in the red crag nor in the Norwich formation. They disappear in the intermediate period, which may be attributed principally to the fragile nature of many of these shells, and in some cases to their having been peculiar to deep and tranquil water. If they should hereafter be detected in beds strictly contemporary with the red crag, it by no means follows that they would alter the proportion of 30 per cent., because with them we might expect to bring to light a great number of extinct species, some of which would probably agree with extinct species of the coralline crag, whilst others would be peculiar to the red crag.
  Newer Pleiocene Deposits in Norfolk.—It also appears, from an examination in which Mr. Wood, Mr. Sowerby, and myself have been engaged, of the land and freshwater shells obtained from the superficial lacustrine or fluviatile deposits of certain parts of Norfolk, Suffolk, and the basin of the Thames, that the proportion of recent species in these formations is much greater than in the Norwich crag, exceeding 90 or 95 per cent., and which I therefore refer to the newer pleiocene or pleistocene period. I allude, not only to certain deposits at Cromer and Mundesley in Norfolk, the shells of which have been collected by Mr. Fitch, of Norwich, but also to those of Stutton, Grays, Ilford, and other places near London; many of which have long been celebrated for the remains of extinct Mammalia. 
The chronological order in which these various tertiary groups follow each other in an ascending series, namely, 1st, the coralline crag; 2ndly, the red crag; Srdly, the mammaliferous or Norwich crag; and 4thly, the lacustrine strata, with mammalian remains;—has been correctly indicated by Mr. Charlesworth, in a paper communicated by him in 1836, to the British Association. In that paper he stated that the proportion of extinct to recent shells had not then been ascertained. It is now satisfactory to find that the palasontological test of age, as derived from the relative approach to the recent Fauna, is perfectly in accordance with the independent evidence drawn from superposition, and the included fragments of older beds. At the same time, the comparative proportion of recent species in the several formations affords us, I conceive, a considerable insight, not only into the order of sequence, but also into the relative distances of the times at which the deposits were formed.
Extension of the Norwich Crag into Yorkshire.—In a former number of this Magazine (vol. viii. o. s. p. 355), Mr. William Bean of Scarborough has described a deposit of sand and clay, containing marine shells, as occurring near Bridlington quay. It was exposed, he says, for a few yards only, on the north side of the harbour, at low water, near the pleasure-ground called the "Esplanade." He now informs me (May, 1839), "that the spot is inaccessible, as the ground has been levelled, and a wall erected next the sea." I am indebted to the liberality of this gentleman for having, in immediate compliance with my request, forwarded to me a set of shells which he obtained from these beds, that they might be examined and compared with the collections of fossil and recent shells in London. They consist of about 35 species, after omitting certain specimens of Balanus, Pecten, Cardium, and Astarte, too imperfect to be determined. Of these 35 no less than 20 are identical with living species, being to the recent in the proportion of nearly 60 per cent., a per-centage coinciding remarkably with that previously obtained from the Norwich crag. No less than 26 moreover of the 35 are identical with species already obtained from the Norwich crag, which, when we consider that the latter has only yielded as yet about 100 marine shells, affords sufficient ground for referring the Yorkshire and Norwich deposits to one and the same period. Some species, moreover, such as the Nucula Cobboldia, so characteristic of the Norwich beds, were found very abundantly by Mr. Bean near Bridlington. Of the nine species not as yet known in the Norwich crag, five are recent, and the other four appear to differ from any previously known shells, whether fossil or recent. They belong to the genera Astarte, Turritella, Natica, and Margarita, and, like one or two extinct shells near Norwich, they may perhaps prove peculiar to the British pleiocene strata. I have received no information at present, either of mammalian remains or of land and freshwater shells, in this Yorkshire portion of the Norwich crag.
  1 In the Appendix to the French translation of my ' Elements of Geology,' I have proposed, for the sake of brevity, to substitute the term Pleiocene for Older Pleiocene, and Pleistocene for Newer Pleiocene, from the Greek wteiirrov, most, and KCUVOC, recent. I have been induced to make this innovation, because in proportion as the progress of science calls for subdivisions of these periods, the longer terms have become more inconvenient. We have often for example, to speak of the older and newer portion both of the older and newer pleiocene epochs. To the pleiocene period I have referred those strata which contain between 40 and 70 per cent of recent species of shells; to the pleistocene those in which the per-centage exceeds 70.
  Contemporaneous Origin of the Suffolk Crag and the Faluns of Touraine.—There is one more subject only to which I shall allude before concluding. When M. Desnoyers first explored the faluns of Touraine and the crag of England, of which he published an account in 1825,1 after visiting Aid- borough, among other places, and inspecting the coralline crag of that neighbourhood, he ascribed a contemporaneous origin to the Suffolk crag and the French faluns. I was then unwilling to embrace this opinion, for various reasons. In the first place I imagined that the per-centage of recent species, in all parts of the English crag, was much larger than that of the Touraine beds; for the shells which I was enabled to submit to the examination of M. Deshayes in 1829, were chiefly derived either from the Norwich beds or the red crag, comparatively small progress having then been made in collecting the fossils of the coralline crag. Admitting that some of the identifications then made by M. Deshayes of crag shells with recent species, were erroneous, it was still unavoidable that he should estimate the percentage for 111 crag shells, gathered indiscriminately from the Norfolk and Suffolk crag, much higher than we now find to hold good in the case of the red or coralline crag taken separately. Secondly, I rejected the idea of the Touraine beds being contemporaneous with the crag, because I had ascertained that the fossils were almost entirely of distinct species, although the two regions are not 300 miles distant the one from the other. M. Deshayes also pronounced the testaceous Fauna of the crag to have a very northern aspect, and that of Touraine an almost tropical character: and yet the crag lies in the 52nd, while the faluns are in the 48th degree of latitude. I stated in the first edition of the 'Principles of Geology' (1830), that so great a discordance in the species of Testacea inhabiting two contiguous seas could not be paralleled in the present state of the globe, except where some rare combination of circumstances occurs, like that on the opposite sides of the Isthmus of Suez, where the Red Sea and the Mediterranean are separated by a tract of land, connected on the one side with Asia and on the other with the whole of Africa. There are not even 10 per cent of the species of Touraine fossil shells identical with shells of the crag, as Mr. Searles Wood has determined after examining for me a collection of about 240 shells which I obtained, in 1837, from M. Dujardin, the same collection from which the figures and descriptions were taken for M. Dujardin's paper on the faluns, in the Transactions of the Geological Society of France. Mr. George Sowerby has also assisted me in the careful examination of the whole of these Touraine shells, and we have come to the conclusion that the recent species are in the proportion of 26 per cent.
  I am now therefore disposed to come round to the opinion of M. Desnoyers, that the red and coralline crag may correspond in age generally with the faluns of Touraine; for although the assemblage of fossils in the one has an extremely northern, and that of the other a southern and sub-tropical character, yet they seem to depart almost equally, though in opposite directions, from the type of the nearest existing marine Fauna. In the red crag we observe a large development of Cyprina, Astarte, and Glycimeris, and of those sections of Fusus, Buccinum, Purpura, and Trochus which are now common in the British or Arctic seas, together with the total absence of even the smallest cones and olives, as well as cowries, except those of diminutive size. In the coralline crag many of the same forms occur, with other genera which we should now only meet with in more equatorial latitudes, as Lingula, Pholadomya, Pyrula, nearly related to Pyr. reticulata, a large Voluta, &c. They are accompanied moreover by many stone corals of extinct genera, and one of these, the Anthophyllum, now occurs within the tropics.
Some explanation, perhaps, of the apparent anomaly of these associations may be sought in the analogy of the present state of parts of the southern hemisphere, which enjoy a mild and equable climate. In South America, for example, Mr. Darwin has shown that certain tropical species and genera will range to very high latitudes, provided their progress be not arrested by severe winter's cold. Thus he found on the east coast of South America, in latitude 39° S., three species of olive (one of large size), a Voluta and a Terebra, among the most abundant shells on the mud-banks of Bahia Blanca; and a large species of volute has been traced as far south as lat. 45°, or, according to some accounts, much farther.— Such forms in the northern hemisphere would be characteristic of tropical seas. It is moreover said that in the southern hemisphere at present, the transition is very sudden from a latitude to which tropical forms extend, to one not far to the south, where there is extreme cold. But we have yet to learn how far such circumstances alone can give rise in the ocean to abrupt lines of demarcation between distinct geographical provinces of Testacea. 
  It appears to me impossible to account for the specific difference of the marine Faunas of Suffolk and Touraine, assuming them to be contemporaneous, without speculating on some other cause which co-operated perhaps with a state of climate like that above suggested, so as to prevent a free range of northern species towards the south, or of the southern species towards the north. Thus, for example, some geographical barrier, such as an isthmus, may formerly have existed between Dover and Calais. If Great Britain, thus joined to the European continent, stretched continuously far to the north, beyond the Shetland islands; while at the same time the Land's End, in Cornwall, was prolonged for some distance in a southerly direction, the two gulfs then placed on the opposite sides of the supposed isthmus might, in the course of time, become the habitations of very distinct assemblages of marine animals, the isthmus constituting the extreme boundary, on one side, of the range of certain tropical animals, and, on the other, of many arctic species.
THE following list of fossil shells from the Norwich crag is the joint work of Mr. Searles Wood, F.G.S., Mr. G. Sowerby, F.L.S., and the author; the fact of certain species being common or not to the red and coralline crag of Suffolk, being given exclusively on the authority of Mr. Wood.


