THERE are two regions in the state of Virginia (a country about equal in area to the whole of England proper) in which productive coal-measures occur. In one of these, which may be called the Western Coal-field, the strata belong to the ancient carboniferous group, characterized by fossil plants of the same genera, and to a great extent the same species, as those found in the ancient coal- measures of Europe. These strata form an integral part of the system of rocks constituting the Appalachian chain, and have been disturbed by the same movements, and subsequently exposed to the same denuding action. Another coal-field, wholly disconnected from the above in its geographical and geological relations, is found to the east of the Appalachian mountains, in the middle of that granitic region sometimes called the Atlantic Slope. This district of granite, gneiss, hornblende, schist, and other hypogene rocks, intervenes between the palaeozoic rocks of the Alleghanies and the low country bordering the Atlantic, which is composed of cretaceous and tertiary deposits. In consequence of the isolated position of these eastern coal-beds, the lowest of which rest immediately on the fundamental granite, while the uppermost are not covered by any overlying fos- siliferous formations, we have scarcely any means of determining their relative age, except by the characters of their included organic remains. The study of these induced Prof. W. B. Rogers, in his memoir published in 1842 (Trans, of American Geologists, p. 298), to declare his opinion that this coal was of newer date than that of the Appalachians, and was about the age of the oolite, a conclusion which, after a careful examination of the evidence on the spot, and of all the organic remains which I could collect, appears to me to come very near the truth. The only doubt that can be entertained on the subject in the present state of our knowledge is, whether we should refer the strata to the triassic or oolitic period; and if we incline with Prof. W. B. Rogers to the latter opinion, these rocks must then he considered as the only ones hitherto known in all Canada and the United States, which have been proved by their organic remains to be of contemporaneous origin with the oolitic or jurassic formation of Europe.
   Before I discuss the question of the relative age of the strata, I shall proceed to describe briefly the geographical extent, position, and geological structure of the coal-field. The tract of country occupied by the crystalline or hypogene rocks which runs parallel to the Alleghany mountains, and on their eastern side, is in this part of Virginia about seventy miles broad; in the midst of this space the coal-field occurs in a depression of the granitic and other hypogene rocks on which the coal rests, and by which it is surrounded along its outcrop. The length of the coal-field from north to south is about twenty-six miles, and its breadth varies from four to twelve miles. It extends over portions of six counties, from Amelia the most southern, through parts of Chesterfield, Powhatan, Henrico, Goochland and Hanover. The James River flows through the middle of it, about fifteen miles from its northern extremity, while the Appomattox River traverses it near its southern borders ; on its eastern side it is distant about thirteen miles from the city of Richmond, the capital of the State of Virginia : it occupies an elliptical area, the beds lying in a trough, the lowest of them usually highly inclined where tney crop out along the margin of the basin, while the strata higher in the series, which appear in the central parts of the basin, are very nearly horizontal. The general strike is about N.N.E. and S.S.W., while that of the nearest ridges of the Appalachian chain is about N.E. and S.W.
   A great portion of these coal-measures consists of quartzose sandstone and coarse grit, some of the beds in the lower part of the series resembling granite or syenite, being entirely composed of the detritus of the neighbouring granitic and syenitic rocks. Dark carbonaceous shales ana clays, occasionally charged with iron ores, abound in the proximity of the coal seams, and numerous impressions of plants, chiefly ferns and Zamites, are met with in shales, together with flattened and prostrate stems of Calamites and Equisetum. These last however, the Calamites and Equisetum, are very commonly met with in a vertical position, more or less compressed perpendicularly. That the greater number of Calamites standing erect in the beds above and between the seams or beds of coal which I saw at points many miles distant from each other, have grown in the places where they are now buried in sand and mud, I entertain no doubt. This fact would imply the gradual accumulation of the coal-measures during a slow and repeated subsidence of the whole region.
   The coal-seams have hitherto been all found at or near the bottom of the series, and the plants in beds below or between them, or immediately overlying. One or two species of shells (Posidonomya ?) also occur in the same part of the series, at a small height above the coal- seams, and above these a great number of fossil fish chiefly referable to two nearly allied species of a genus very distinct from any ichthyolite hitherto discovered elsewhere. Above these fossiliferous beds, which probably never exceed 400 or 500 feet in thickness, a great succession of grits, sandstone and shales, of unknown depth, occur. They have yielded no coal, nor as yet any organic remains, and no speculator has been bold enough to sink a shaft through them, as it is feared that toward the central parts of the basin they might have to pass through 2000 or 2500 feet of sterile measures before reaching the fundamental coal-seams.
	.
   The annexed ideal section (1) will show the manner in which I suppose the coal-field to be placed in a hollow in the granitic rocks, the whole country having suffered, by great denudation, and the surface having been planed off almost uniformly, and at the same time overspread by a deep covering of gravel and red and yellow clay, concealing the subjacent formation from view, so that the structure of the region could not be made out without difficulty but for the artificial excavations. It will be seen by the section that the tertiary strata appear at Richmond, about thirteen miles from the eastern outcrop of the coal, and they continue to occupy the lower country between that city and the Atlantic.
   It has been stated, that the only beds of coal hitherto discovered lie in the lower part of the coal-measures, and that consequently they crop out all round the margin of the basin. As the dip is usually at a considerable angle, vertical shafts from 400 to 800 feet deep are required to reach the coal at the distance of a few hundred yards inside the edge of the basin; it is only therefore along a very narrow band of country that the coal comes up to the surface naturally, and even here it is for the most part buried under superficial red- and yellow clay with sand and gravel, the whole often 30 or 40 feet thick. I saw no erratic blocks or far-transported materials in the detritus, but it is so continuous as to conceal the junction of the carboniferous and granitic rocks, and I felt some curiosity to learn how the existence of coal in such a country had been originally suspected. It appears that in Chesterfield, the county where the richest seams occur, the coal enters very largely into the composition of the overlying gravel and sand, and at the old Blackheath pits, which were first worked between the years 1785 and 1790, a fallen tree displayed fragments of coal in the soil adhering to its roots, which led to excavations, and the discovery, at the depth of a few yards, of a rich bed of bituminous coal, no less than 30 feet thick, of excellent quality. Being so near the surface, it was for a time worked with great profit; but very exaggerated notions were formed, both here and in the vicinity, of the real thickness of the main seam, due allowance not being made at first for the dip of the beds through which the shafts passed down obliquely to the planes of stratification. In the valley of a small tributary of the James River, about two miles north of Blackheath, I saw, exposed in a natural section of drift, a bed of rubbly coal, which might easily have betrayed the existence of the seam from the waste of which it had been derived.
   It has been usually stated in reports on this coal-field, that north of the James River the coal is divided into two or three seams, while to the south of the same river it forms one huge seam from 30 to 40 feet thick. Such however is not the case, the coal being almost everywhere separated into three distinct beds, and sometimes more, and this division being observable quite as much in the southern as in the northern half of the trough. The uppermost seam is almost always the most important. Thus in the Clover-hill pits, near the Appomattox River, towards the southern extremity of the basin, I found five seams of coal, all as usual at the margin of the basin. Here, about 160 feet of grit and shale intervene between the lowest of the five seams and the fundamental granite and hornblende schist. Of this section I shall have to say more in the sequel. In all the localities I visited, the thickest bed of coal or the main seam is the uppermost, except at Clover-hill just mentioned, where a thin layer of coal is met with still higher; but it is not continuous for any distance. Along the western margin of the basin at Dover, for example, I observed the same division of the coal into two or more seams ; nor am I aware of any place, except Blackheath and the adjoining parts of Chesterfield county, where all the seams appear united as it were into one, of unusual strength, from 30 to 40 feet thick,—to explain which we may perhaps adopt the theory of Mr. Bowman, and suppose the vegetation to which the coal is due to have grown uninterruptedly in this spot, while elsewhere it was frequently arrested for a time in its progress by subsidence, which submerged certain areas and permitted the deposition of mud and sand to take place upon the materials of the future coal. This unity however of the coal-seam in the Blackheath region is of small extent, and even in the purest mass there occur thin intercalated layers of shale and sandstone with pyrites, to separate which from the coal costs the miner no small labour. These “ partings” of sedimentary matter, which in some spots swell out rapidly from a few inches to a thickness of several feet, or even yards, make the great seam of Blackheath much less of an exceptional case in a geological point of view than might at first be supposed. The inconsiderable distance to which the undivided state of the seam extends, is shown by the section obtained only a quarter of a mile to the south of Blackheath in the Midlothian pits, where a shaft sunk to the depth of 774 feet passed through the undermentioned beds.


  It will be seen that here, within a quarter of a mile of the Black- heath pit, there are two seams of coal—one, the uppermost, more than 30 feet thick, and the other separated from it by 9 feet of intervening shale and sandstone about one foot thick; this lowest seam being within four feet of the fundamental granite, and parted from it by beds of grit and shale. Some deduction must be made from all the estimated thicknesses of the beds as above stated, the inclinations of the beds cut through by the vertical shaft being at an angle of 20°. After making this deduction, however, the magnitude and persistency of this seam, from 30 to 40 feet in thickness, consisting of as pure a mass of rich bituminous coal as can perhaps be found in the world, even in the old carboniferous formations, are truly remarkable, especially when we take into account its geological age. I was indeed not a little surprised when I first arrived at Blackheath and descended a shaft 800 feet deep, to find myself in a chamber more than 40 feet high, caused by the removal of the coal. Timber props of great strength are required to support the roof, and although the use of wood is lavish here as everywhere in the United States, the props are seen to bend under the incumbent weight. The great seam in some places at Blackheath is seen actually to touch the fundamental granite, or is parted from it only by an inch or two of shale. The unevenness of the granite floor is extremely great, as represented in the annexed drawing, Fig. 2 1; and the manner in which, in these troubles as they are called, the coal is squeezed out at one point and made to swell and thicken at another, B, must be referred to movements of the rocks and the forcing of the granite against the coal, the distinct layers of which are often cut off abruptly one after the other by the granite in contact. The dips of the strata of coal in the neighbourhood of these sudden thickenings and swellings of the seams vary from 20° to 70°, and at one point attained an angle of 84°. Polished surfaces or slichen- sides, with their planes turned in various directions, also bear testimony to the sliding and friction which the beds have undergone. Some of the alleged varieties in the thickness of the great seam at short distances may be explained by sudden changes in the angle of dip, which, as before stated, might cause an exaggerated estimate wherever an inclined stratum is cut through vertically in vertical shafts ; but it appears that where the coal is nearly horizontal, it often is far from uniform in strength at points a few hundred yards apart. The beds which I actually observed at Blackheath and the neighbourhood varied in their inclination from 8° to 42°, the dip being always westerly.
  The great uncertainty of the depths at which the coal can be won in sinking shafts at known distances from the natural outcrop or from previous workings, proves the irregularity of the dip, and implies in some places sudden flexures, or more probably vertical faults. An example of one of these occurs in comparing the sections exposed in the Creek and White Chimney pits. A shaft at the former or Creek mine being sunk 400 feet deep to the main seam, the coal was followed for 15 yards westward in the direction of the dip at an angle of 20°. The White Chimney or Old Midlothian shaft was then sunk 500 yards westward of the former, and the same great bed of coal, with the granite below it, was entered at the depth of 360 feet. If the dip of about one in three continued westward, in this instance, an upthrow of more than 100 yards would be required to account for the position of the coal so near the surface in the more westerly pit.
  About five miles north of the Midlothian shaft last mentioned, at Duval’s pit, which is also on the eastern outcrop, the coal-measures are seen near the granite to be arranged in a small trough extending only a few hundred yards east and west. At this place there are three beds of coal, which m the deepest part of the small basin are only 200 feet from the surface. Again, at the northern extremity of the whole coalfield, at the Deep-run pits, there is another example of a small basin only a mile and a half in its longest diameter, from N.N.E. to S.S.W., and half a mile in breadth. The coal there is similar in quality to that of Blackheath, and I found the accompanying shales full of that splendid fern, the T&niopteris magnifolia, spread out between the laminae, as in the shales of Clover-hill at the southern end of the coalfield. The same Calamites, Equisetum and Zamites also occur there, and in nearly every locality, though some species of ferns have only as yet been met with at one place, as for example the Filicites fimbria tus (Bunbury) and Pecopteris bullata (Bunbury), which I found at the Deep-run mines just mentioned, and Neuropteris linncecefolia found at Blackheath. It is the opinion of some of the miners, that where several seams of coal occur, they would form, if united, a single seam, about equal in the aggregate to the average thickness of the great single bed of coal in the Blackheath region; but it seemed to me that the strength of the beds in most of the workings would never approach in importance the single main seam in the Blackheath and Midlothian pits—and here also the seam is sometimes no less than 30 feet thick where other beds of coal intervene between it and the granite. This may be seen about two miles north of the Engine pit, at the place where the coal was first obtained in 1785, in the valley of a small tributary of the James River. The main seam is there 30 feet thick at its outcrop, and in the coal-measures separating it from the granite, consisting of grit and shale 200 feet thick, are seen two beds of coal, the uppermost three feet and the lowest about one foot thick.
   It was before stated (page 263), that there have been no borings for coal in the central parts of the coal-field; the only section I could obtain of the beds far from the margin of the basin is that afforded by the cuttings along the Richmond and Lynchbury canal, and these are only a few yards in depth. The beds here consist of shale and quartzose grit, one undivided stratum of which, ten feet thick, was very conspicuous.
   Wherever I observed these strata closely, their dip was about 10° south-east; but on reaching the western outcrop of the coal at Dover, only three-quarters of a mile from where the beds are so slightly inclined on the canal, I found the coal-measures dipping at an angle of no less than 50° east, or opposite to that prevailing at Blackheath on the other side of the trough. The seams of coal at Dover correspond very closely at their outcrop near the granite with those before mentioned, where the western dip prevails, the main seam at Dover being 16 feet thick, and there being two other thinner ones below. Only a mile or two south of the open shaft at Dover, where I saw the beds dipping at an angle of 50°, I observed the strata near the granite to be almost horizontal. The same may be said of the strata three miles south of the Powhatan pits, near their junction with the crystalline rocks on the eastern outcrop. I was told also of instances of the strata dipping towards the granite, as for example three miles south-east of the Midlothian pits before mentioned. In short, the disturbances have been so great, that although the general structure of the coalfield is that of a basin or trough, as before stated, the deviations from this form are numerous.
  The coal of Eastern Virginia, although derived from a different vegetation from that of the ancient carboniferous period, resembles very closely the older coal in structure, appearance and composition. That of the Blackheath mine has usually a highly resinous lustre and conchoidal fracture, and always contains at least as large a proportion of gaseous or volatile ingredients (hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen) as the coal of the palaeozoic rocks of the United States.
  The coal is also divided into horizontal layers of slight thickness parallel to the planes of stratification, as in the older kind of coal. Sometimes these layers consist alternately of highly crystalline and resinous coal with a bright lustre, and of other portions exactly resembling charcoal in appearance. The same is observed in some of our Welsh coal, where the charcoal is called “mother coal.”
  My friend Dr. Hooker has had the kindness to examine for me some specimens of this Virginian charcoal, which I procured at the Blackheath mines, and others from those of Clover-hill before alluded to, and he finds vegetable structure in both, but appearing in each locality to belong to a different species of plant. At first he thought they might be referable to ferns, but abandoned that opinion from the total absence of cellular and scalariform tissues. The prominent glands of the fibres are much more minute than the glands of coniferous tissue, whilst the large perforated tubes are foreign to that order. They depart still more widely from Zamia, and do not indeed present any obvious affinity with any existing natural order. “Both are very opake, much crushed, ana so fragile that it is difficult to obtain fragments fit for microscopic investigation. They principally consist of a mass of parallel fibres or elongated cells, amongst which occur very large tubes whose walls are pierced with circular, or longitudinally or transversely elongated holes, either scattered or placed very close together.
  Next to the ferns, the most abundant vegetable remains in the coal- measures under consideration are two species of Calamites and the Equisetum columnare, especially the former, and the bark of the Calamites is usually converted into coal. It is therefore natural to conjecture, that the thin layers resembling charcoal may have been derived from Calamites, a plant of which the botanical structure is still unknown. Dr. Hooker, in reply to this suggestion, tells me that some fossil charcoal in the Museum of the Geological Society, from the English coal formation, supposed to be derived from Calamites, is very like that of the Virginia coal above described.
  The cities of New York and Philadelphia have for many years supplied themselves with coal from the Blackheath mines, for the manufacture of gas for lighting their streets and houses. The annual quantity taken by Philadelphia alone has of late years amounted to 10,000 tons. It will appear from the annexed table of analyses of specimens of coal, which Mr. P. H. Henry has had the kindness to make for me, that the proportion of volatile ingredients—hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen—in this newer coal of the James River comes exceedingly close to that found in the older coal of America, which it so much resembles in aspect and structure. The specimen from Tuscaloosa in Alabama was from the old coal formation described by me in the Journal of this Society for 1846, vol. ii. page 278, in which are found precisely the same plants as in the coal of the Appalachians, of Nova Scotia, and of the north of England. The other three specimens, from Clover-hill, Blackheath, and the Deep-run mines respectively, represent the southern, middle, and northern parts of the coal-field treated of in this memoir. On comparing this analysis of the Clover-hill coal as here given, with Dr. Percy’s analysis of the older coal from Pomeroy on the Ohio (see this Journal, vol. i. p. 199, May 1844), we cannot but be struck with the identity of the results, as far as relates to the proportions of carbon and hydrogen. Thus the ancient coal of Pomeroy gave, carbon 76*70, hydrogen 5*67, in which it will be seen that the figures are the same, except the decimals, as in the analysis of the newer coal from Clover-hill. Nearly the same remarks "are applicable when we compare the Blackheath coal and that of Tuscaloosa in the annexed table.
   That there should be a disengagement of inflammable gas from this coal, containing so much volatile matter, was to be expected; accordingly, in spite of the usual precautions taken to prevent accidents, several fatal explosions have occurred; one of these happened at Blackheath in the old pit in 1839, by which forty-five negroes and two white overseers lost their lives. They were killed, not by choke damp, but by the combustion of carburetted hydrogen, attributed by the miners to the spontaneous ignition of coal mixed with decomposing pyrites. The most approved methods of ventilating the mines had been introduced, but Another terrible accident occurred so late as the year 1844, at the depth of more than 900 feet, at Blackheath, occasioned by the leaking out of gas from some deserted works, which had been ineffectually dammed off from the new galleries.
   Although rocks of volcanic origin do not form a prominent feature in the geological structure of this coal-field, as they do in the region of the new red sandstone of Connecticut and New Jersey, they are not wanting, and I shall next describe the manner of their interference with the strata and the changes they cause at and near their contact.
   At the southern extremity of the coal-field at Clover-hill before alluded to, four miles north of the Appomattox River on “ Johnson’s Tract,” a dike of greenstone is seen about 20 feet thick, running W. 10° S.; the coal-measures crop out here near the granite at various angles between 10° and 45°. Near the locality last mentioned, I obtained at the Beaver mine a section passing through five seams of coal: see Section Fig. 5. The fundamental rocks consisted of granite and hornblende schist, on which repose coal-measures, chiefly of white sandstone and shale 500 feet thick with three seams of coal, the uppermost of which was cut through by the dike of greenstone, the coal, as the miners expressed it, having been burnt up by it and altered into a kind of coke. On the altered coal No. 3 rests a solid undivided stratum of sandstone 10 feet thick, and on this a seam of coal 4 feet thick, to which succeeds slaty shale 30 feet thick, and on this rests the fifth seam or main coal, 10 to 12 feet thick. Then follow strata of sandstone, shale and other rocks without coal for a thickness of about 160 feet, exposed continuously. The next point to the north where I saw greenstone in connexion with the coal-measures was in Sally’s Tract, within a mile-and-a-half of the James River and near the United States’ Arsenal, about sixteen miles north of Clover-hill pits last mentioned. In this region some of the coal is affected and more or less deprived of its bituminous qualities, although not in contact with the igneous rock, which however I traced to within 120 feet of the altered coal, and it may approach much nearer.
  Not far from the same locality, in “Burfoot’s Tract,” about three- quarters of a mile from the Arsenal on the James River, the principal coal-seam was described to me as damaged by the near approach to it of the whin and a kind of coke produced. The mass of trap was visible, a greenstone of the ordinary character 28 feet thick, and near it a brec- ciated rock of hardened shale varied by patches of carbonaceous matter resembling impure coke in appearance. The locality, like all the others, is near the junction of the coal-measures and the granite. Before visiting the Richmond or East Virginia coal-field, I had been asked by some geologists, whether it was not a singular phenomenon that some upper beds of coal had been deprived of all their volatile matter, while others below remained perfectly unaltered and bituminous? The explanation appears to be simply this: that the greenstone, although intrusive, has often here, as is so common elsewhere, made its way between the strata like a conformable deposit, and has driven out the gaseous matter from the upper coal, while its influence has often not extended to lower seams. In fact, at Duval’s and farther north, at Townes and Powell’s pits, the trap overlies the coal, and forms a bed having the same dip as the coal-bearing strata.
  At the first-mentioned of the above places (Duval’s pit, on the south bank of the James River), a shaft, open at the time of my visit, had passed through—first, 105 feet of sandstone and shale, then the greenstone reduced to a thickness of 6 feet and parallel to the strata. Below the trap, strata 25 feet thick, similar to those above, were met with, and then the main seam of coal 10 feet thick, of which the quality was not affected as in some adjacent mines, owing probably to the thinness of the greenstone and the interposition of the other rocks. Below the coal the miners entered black slaty rocks 35 feet thick with numerous prostrate and upright Calamites, and then reached a second bed of coal 3 feet thick of excellent quality resting on other carbonaceous slates with Calamites. Next came the bottom coal 6 feet thick, also unchanged: some other thin partings of coal between this bed and the fundamental granite, show how various are the modifications under which the seams of coal present themselves,—a diversity probably connected with the variations in the amount of the subsidence to which the erect position of the Calamites observed at intervals over so wide an area clearly points.
  The most remarkable example of natural coke met with in this or any other coal-field known to me, occurs at Townes and Powell’s pits at Edge-hill, a locality between five and six miles north of the James River and ten north of Blackheath, being also on the eastern outcrop of the basin and within 500 yards of the granite. A large quantity of coke, used for furnaces and other economical purposes, is here extracted from a bed about 8 feet thick, below which at greater depth are two beds of imperfect coal. The measures passed through above the 8-feet-bed of coke are 110 feet thick, including a conformable bed of blue basalt 16 feet thick. The shale immediately below the trap was white for 11 feet, and then 25 feet of dark leafy shale succeeded, below which came the bed of coke resting on white shale, and lower down coal-measures with two seams of inferior coal, each about 4 or 5 feet thick. The shale, 47 feet thick, interposed between the basalt and the coke, exhibits so many polished surfaces or slickensides, and is so much jointed and cracked, and in some places disturbed and tilted (in one area of 12 feet the beds being vertical), that we may probably attribute the change from coal to coke, not so much to the heating agency of the intrusive basalt, as to its mechanical effect in breaking up the integrity of the beds, and rendering them permeable to water, or the gases of decomposing coal. In some places in the same district where the upper part of a seam is coke, the lower is coal, and there is sometimes a gradation from the one to the other, and sometimes, I was told, a somewhat abrupt separation. The general dip of the strata in this locality is W.S.W. Calamites are abundant in the beds associated with the coke.
  I observed that some of the basalt of the neighbourhood assumed a very regular concretionary and spheroidal structure on exposure to the air. About 200 yards north of the great coke-pit, the trap, 14 feet thick, is found within 26 feet of the surface. At the distance of about two miles south of Townes and Powell’s, at Crouch’s pits, 300 feet deep, where no trap occurs, the coal is bituminous and unchanged.
  In the Frostburg coal (see same paper), the total quantity of volatile ingredients (hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen) does not greatly exceed that detected in the coke of Edge-hill, or Townes and Powell’s, although the latter is so much less inflammable.
  Mr. Mitchell, in his ‘ Geology of North Carolina’ (1842), p. 133, observes, that the theory of the fluviatile origin of the sandstone of North Carolina (which, like that of East Virginia, contains coal) is open to this objection : “ That it takes no account of the trap, which is not only imbedded in it, but traverses the sandstone in a thousand different directions. The same trap (he adds) is not met with in the slates and granité which lie adjacent to the sandstone, and the area of a river or estuary could not have been liable throughout its whole extent in length and breadth to injections and eruptions of trap, whilst nothing of the kind occurred upon its banks.” The same might be said of the red sandstone districts of the valley of the Connecticut and of New Jersey, for there also we no sooner pass the limits of the sedimentary strata and enter on the hypogene region, than all the conspicuous masses of trap cease to show themselves. But the explanation of this phænomenon has probably occurred to the mind of every experienced geologist. The same greenstone which alters the coal at Clover-hill, above alluded to, crosses in the form of a narrow dike through the adjacent hornblende schist ; and Mr. Percival of Newhaven pointed out to me in 1842 several trap dikes in Connecticut traversing the mica schist which forms the western border of the “ new red sandstone” district of that State. I saw other dikes to the eastward of the same region, east of Newhaven ; and if they are not everywhere traceable, it arises from the wide extent and depth of the “drift” or ancient alluvium which everywhere overspreads the hypogene formations. The apparently abrupt cessation of the volcanic rocks, when we enter the granitic area, arises from the more compact and crystalline form which they assume where they have been consolidated in fissures which were deep-sited originally, before the denudation of the country exposed the hypogene formations to view. Under such circumstances the narrow dikes of more modern igneous rocks are scarcely distinguishable from some members of the older and accompanying plutonic family, and they nowhere expand into dense conformable masses, nor form amygdaloids nor trap tuffs. Hence they are easily overlooked in a cursory survey, although in reality very numerous, and often persistent for great distances.
  I shall now consider the chronological relation of the coal-field, in determining which we have no direct evidence from superposition. The only other strata occupying a similar position in the hypogene region on the Atlantic Slope, with the exception of some of a similar character near Raleigh in North Carolina, are those commonly called the new red sandstone of Massachussets, Connecticut, and New Jersey. In part of New Jersey the strata of that red sandstone are unconformable to a part of the palaeozoic series of the Appalachian system, and are therefore subsequent in origin to the movements which gave to the old carboniferous and other still more ancient groups of the Alleghany mountains, their present strike, dip, and flexures. The red sandstone therefore being posterior in date to the Appalachian coal strata, the next question is, whether the coal-field near Richmond is of the same age as the red sandstone, or of newer or older date ? The difficulty of replying to the inquiry consists in this : that most of the fossils of the so-called new red sandstone are fish, or the foot-tracks of birds, without any plants, while those of the coal near Richmond are almost exclusively confined to plants, so that we have scarcely as yet any satisfactory terms of comparison in the same family of organic beings common to the two. Before alluding to the plants, I shall say something of the small number of shells and ichthyolites which I met with in the coal-field near Richmond.
  In the carbonaceous shales associated with the main seam, and usually not far above, a great number of minute flattened bivalves are often observed in some places, as at Harden’s pits, north of Black- heath (see «, fig. 6). They resemble Cyclas in outline; they are thin and compressed, have a horny texture, oval and inequilateral, with a surface concentrically furrowed and somewhat wrinkled. They resemble Posidonomya, and more than any other the P. minutfr. They occur in such immense numbers as to divide the shale-like plates of mica into very thin laminae. Every fresh surface exhibits a layer of them. In their gregarious character they resemble the genus Cypris as it occurs in the cypriferous marls of Auvergne.
  With them is another smaller and more convex bivalve shell which resembles a young Astarte, but may perhaps bfe the young of the preceding (see b, fig. 6). The same shell was also presented to me by Dr. Werth, from the Creek mines south of Blackheath, also in black shale.
  At the Deep-run pits I saw traces of the same shell, but in none of these places in a perfect state : the genus Posidonomya in Europe is considered to be characteristic of the triassic period, in which the P. minuta occurs in England (see fig. 4. plate 28. vol. v. Geol. Trans. 2nd series). I have stated, that the manner in which these extremely thin shells occur by myriads, like plates of mica between the partings of the shale, reminded me of the exuviae of the Cypris in the freshwater marls of Auvergne. Mr. Morris has shown me a recent bivalve crustacean from Bahia Blanca in South America, having a delicate, crumpled or corrugated horny shell, bearing so great a resemblance to the Posidonomya, that I cannot help sharing his doubts whether the latter genus may not be allied to Cypris rather than to any genus of the true Mollusca, i. e. to Avicula.
  After much careful search, and the indefatigable exertions of my friend Mr. A. F. D. Gifford, residing at the Blackheath mines, I was unable to procure the remains of more than three species of fossil fish, most of which, and the only perfect ones, are referable to a new genus of the homocercal class. On seeing these ichthyolites (September 1846), M. Agassiz, ignorant of their locality, at once suggested, from the analogy of European forms, that they were of the age of the lias; as being all homocercal, and the large smooth scales of one species belonging to the genus Tetragonolepis. This opinion would accord with the inference previously deduced from the fossil plants by Professor W. B. Rogers. As all the fish hitherto obtained from the sandstone (commonly called the “ new red ”) of the Connecticut River, four or five species in number, are heterocercal, this would indicate a distinct and probably a more modern date for the Virginian coal-bearing strata. Could we therefore feel sure that the beds containing ichthyolites and the foot-prints of birds in the valley of the Connecticut were triassic, it would afford strong ground for presuming the oolitic age of the Virginian coal strata. But I conceive the question is still open, whether the Connecticut sandstone be of Permian or triassic date.
  I shall now offer a description of the Virginian ichthyolites, drawn up chiefly from notes supplied me by Prof. Agassiz and Sir Philip Egerton.
  This species is the most abundant, occurring in strata of argillaceous sandstone about 150 feet above the main seam of coal in Chesterfield county. It is the same one which was described by Mr. W. C. Redfield, under the name of Catopterus macrurus. The following are the characters given by him :—
   Catopterus macrurus, Large-finned Catopterus. This beautiful species is distinguished by its broad and flowing fins, of which the anal is so extended as to be nearly joined by the caudal fin. The latter is finely extended. The length of this species is from four to five inches ; its width from one and one-eighth to one and three-eighths of an inch. The margins of the fins are remarkably fine and beautiful. The posterior margin of the scales seems to be curled slightly outward, giving the surface a somewhat roughened appearance.
   The genus Catopterus was instituted by Mr. Redfield for certain species of heterocercal fish from the Connecticut red sandstone, and the species under consideration having, as before stated, a homocercal tail, cannot be comprehended in it. Sir P. Egerton also remarks, that the dorsal fin is more strictly opposite to the anal than in Catopterus Redfieldi, which in this respect approaches nearest to the species under consideration; the tail, according to Agassiz and Sir P. Egerton, bearing the greatest resemblance to that of the genus Pho- lidophorus. The numerous and uniform articulations give to its large anal fin a net-like appearance, which has led Sir Philip to suggest the generic name of Dictyopygeanus. The specific name of Mr. Redfield must of course be retained.
   I procured several specimens of this ichthyolite, the most perfect of which here figured (PI. VIII.) is exactly 6 inches long from the mouth to the extremity of the tail, and 1 \ inch broad, but some were a fifth shorter. I do not observe the curled appearance mentioned by Mr. Redfield, in the posterior margin of the scales, which may have arisen perhaps from their being in a disturbed or injured state. The somewhat lengthened shape of the scales of the lateral line, pointed out to me by Mr. Dinkel the artist, causes a marked dividing line between the scales above and below it. In figure e, PI. VIII., the peculiar shape of these scales of the lateral line will be seen, some of them having the opening of the tube outwards, others not, and the projection of the tube in the anterior part of each scale fitting into a notch in the scale immediately preceding.
I may also remark, 1st, The opercular and frontal bones of the head are covered with extremely minute scales. 2ndly, The raylets on the anterior margin of the caudal fin alluded to in Mr. Redfield’s description are stronger and broader in the lower lobe of the tail than in the upper. 3rdly, The insertion of the anterior ray of the dorsal fin begins nearly opposite the middle of the anal fin, and in consequence of the great extension of the latter towards the tail, it continues to be opposite the whole length of the dorsal. The pectoral and ventral fins are rarely to be seen, but have left impressions in some specimens.
   Portions apparently belonging to a second species of the same genus occur in some of the slabs of stone from Chesterfield county, the scales being so much larger in proportion to the size of the individual, that in corresponding parts of the body, five scales occupy the place of seven in the preceding species.
   PI. IX. fig. 2. represents nearly the whole side, with part of the lateral line near the head, of a specimen from Blackheath: natural size.
   Although a few fragments only of this ichthyolite were obtained, they were recognized at once by M. Agassiz as belonging to the distinct genus Tetragonolepis, and to resemble the large liassic species with smooth scales. A scale from the lateral line, magnified about four times (a, fig. 2. PI. IX.), shows the manner in which the tube in some of these scales opens outwards. Each scale in the lateral line has also a notch posteriorly.
   I have stated that all the fish of the red sandstone of Connecticut differ from those of Virginia. A fine collection of the former was made by Prof. B. Silliman, jun., and myself, at Durham, Connecticut, in 1842, which M. Agassiz and Sir P. Egerton have examined for me. They belong to three species :—1st, Palceoniscus fultus, Agassiz (Ischypterus fultus, Egerton), of various sizes and ages, some of the varieties comprising the Palceoniscus macropterus of Redfield, which is considered by M. Agassiz to be the same. Sir P. Egerton has proposed for Palseoniscus the generic name of Ischypterus, from KT\VS, strength, and nrepor, fin, from the great size and strength of the fulcral rays of the dorsal fin. They differ from Palseoniscus, as Mr. Redfield first pointed out, by having the vertebral column prolonged to a more limited extent into the upper lobe of the tail, or, in the language of M. Agassiz, they are less heterocercal. The teeth also, according to Sir P. Egerton, who in 1844 examined for me a fine series of specimens from Durham, Connecticut, differ from those of Palseoniscus in being strong and conical. The oral aperture is smaller and the scales smoother than in the Palseonisci of the magnesian limestone or Permian beds of Europe, in which the scales are striated and serrated on the posterior margins. Some of the carboniferous Palseonisci of Europe resemble the American fish in having similar smooth scales.
  3rdly, Catopterus Redfieldi, a broader fish than the preceding, and with scales not so long in proportion to their depth.
  These three, and all others found in the same (new red sandstone?) formation, are heterocercal. Sir P. Egerton is of opinion that far too much importance has been attached by some geologists to the circumstance of the vertebral column not being prolonged so far into the upper lobe of the tail in these genera, Ischypterus and Catopterus, as it is in true Paleeonisci, when they have insisted upon it as an argument in favour of the red sandstone of Connecticut being less ancient than the palaeozoic period. For at Autun, in France, we find the genus Ischypterus accompanying the true Palseonisci with fossil plants specifically the same as those of the old coal.
  It would be rash to attempt to settle the chronological relations of any group of strata by the presence of some one peculiar generic form of fish; but if we are to reason on the occurrence of Ischypterus in the present state of our knowledge, it must be in favour of identifying the red sandstone of Connecticut with the beds which belong to the uppermost members of the old coal of Europe, as at Autun the coal-measures are almost passing upwards into Permian. The Irish Palceoniscus catopterus of Roan (or Rhone) Hill, Tyrone, referred by Captain Portlock to the trias, is a true Paleeoniscus, and not allied generically either to the Ischypterus of Egerton or the Catopterus of Redfield.
  I know of no character in any of the fossils of this coal-field which is inconsistent with the hypothesis that all the strata may have been deposited in a lake, estuary or river-delta. The plants are all terrestrial, and the occurrence of erect Calamites and Equiseta at various heights in the series, and at points widely distant, implies, according to my view, that they were not drifted, but grew on the area where we now find them. Hence I infer the constant proximity of land, the drainage of which may have supplied a body of fresh water. Of the genus Posidonomya too little is as yet known to permit us to reason on its habits. In regard to the fish (omitting the new genus), I am informed by Sir P. Egerton that Tetragonolepis is accompanied in the British lias by Lepidotus, which last genus abounds in the freshwater strata of the Wealden in England.
  It will appear from the subjoined account, drawn up by Mr. Charles J. F. Bunbury, of the fossil plants procured by me from the coal-field, that they belong to fifteen forms, and that they bear upon the whole a very decided analogy to the oolitic and triassic Flora of Europe. The Calamites arenaceus, one of the most abundant plants, has as yet been traced up no higher than the trias in Europe.
The Equisetum columnare is said to be common to the trias and oolite in Europe. Among the ferns, Pecopteris Whitbiemis, which I procured, seems to have been correctly identified by Mr. W. B. Rogers, and is one of the commonest species of the Yorkshire oolite. The large Tseniopteris is also allied to some of the Yorkshire oolite ferns. The genus Zamites is represented by many species in the oolitic rocks of Europe, but is also triassic.
  The fossil, somewhat like a Stigmaria which Dr. Hooker has had the kindness to figure for me, has more of the aspect of a plant from the old coal than any other, but we have not as yet sufficient knowledge of its true relations to found any argument upon it. I may remark also, that if some of the plants and the shell called Posidonomya should indicate a formation rather older than the Whitby oolite, they may still belong to part of the great jurassic period; for the Whitby coal occurs in, or immediately below, the great oolite, which is succeeded in descending order by the inferior oolite and the lias. Now as we have not in Europe any coal-fields, nor any large development of a fossil flora in these older subdivisions of the jurassic group, the Virginian strata may correspond in age either to the inferior oolite or the lias, and for that reason may have more of a triassic character in their organic remains than the coal strata of Whitby in Yorkshirei. The occurrence of the large smooth scales of a fish of the genus Tetragonolepis, so characteristic of the lias, favours this view. It has been well remarked by Prof. W. B. Rogers, that the few plants discovered by Captain Grant in connexion with the oolite-coal series in Cutch, resemble very closely those of the East Virginian coal- measures f. There can be no doubt that the Indian fossils belong to the oolitic period, from the character of the numerous marine shells found in some of the associated strata.
  Upon the whole, therefore, I arrive at the same result as Prof. W. B. Rogers, namely, that the coal-field of Eastern Virginia agrees in age with the lower members of the oolitic or jurassic group of Europe, —a conclusion which is important, because these strata constitute at present the only representatives of this group hitherto discovered in the United States of North America. If future researches should require any modification of this opinion, we may then expect that the trias will be the group to which the American formation will be referable.
  In conclusion I may observe, that I was much struck with the general similarity of this more modern coal-field, and one of palaeozoic date near St. Etienne in France, which also rests on granitic rocks, from the detritus of which its coarse grits and sandstone are composed. In both these coal-fields upright Catamites abound; fossil plants are met with in both, almost to the exclusion of all other classes of organic remains, shells especially being absent. The character of the coal is similar, but in the richness and thickness of the seams, the Virginian formation is pre-eminent. When we behold phenomena so identical repeated at an epoch so much more modern in the earth’s history, and at a time when a very distinct vegetation had been established, we may derive from the fact a useful caution in regard to many popular generalizations respecting a peculiar state of the globe during the remoter of the two periods alluded to. Some geologists, for example, have supposed an atmosphere densely charged with carbonic acid to be necessary to explain the origin of coal—an atmosphere unfit for the existence of air-breathing vertebrate animals ; but this theory they will hardly be prepared to extend to so modern an epoch as the oolitic or triassic.
  
  






























   1 For this and several other documents relating to this coal-field, and for numerous organic remains, I am indebted to the kindness and exertions of my friend Mr. A. F. D. Gifford, under whose superintendence 1 found the Blackheath mines. I have also to acknowledge the liberality of Dr. Samuel H. Royal of Blackheath, who presented me with fossil fish, and plants of great rarity and beauty.

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

