THE natural history of serpentine is still involved in considerable obscurity, and although of late years much attention has been directed to its examination, there is, perhaps, no rock of such extensive occurrence, and such decided characters, whose geological relations are equal-ly unascertained.
  In the locality which I am now about to describe, the connections of the serpentine with the accompanying strata are clear and unequivocal, and as it occurs there in great abundance, and distinguished by its most striking mineralogical characters, the phenomena which attend it. can scarcely fail to throw light on its general history.
  I was fortunate in having an opportunity, during the last summer, of examining the spot where it is found, in company with Professor Buckland, from whose active co-operation, I derived great assistance. 
The age and relative position of the stratified rocks, with which the serpentine is associated, are preliminary points, on whose determination depends much of the novelty and importance of the geological facts which it will be my object to detail. 
The limits, however, of the present communication will not permit me to enlarge on the history of these strata, which I have carefully examined on the coast of Forfarshire, near the Red Head, where the cliffs present us with a section of those beds, which lie beneath the great conglomerate, andwhich form the chief part of the Seedlay chain. The coast on the north of Stonehaven, the rivers N-and S. Esk, Melgum, Islay,and others, have also afforded me distinct sections, of the same formation, which is there seen extending along the southern boundary of the Grampians. From the study of these sections, I am enabled to state, with regard to the strata in question, that they are younger than the greywacke and clay-slate, and older than the great mass of conglomerate, which, in Scotland stretches valong the foot of the Grampians, from sea to sea.
  In this conglomerate, which may probably be regarded as the lowest member of the old red sandstone formation, are found imbedded numerous masses of the above mentioned slaty sandstone and shale, and it follows, from the above facts, that the latter occupy, Yin Forfarshire and Kincardineshire, the Same place in the series, as the strata of the red sandstone and shale, so exactly resembling them in character, which, in Gloucestershire, are inter-stratified with the transition limestone. 
  No organic remains, however, have hitherto been discovered in these lower sandstones in Forfarshire, Perthshire, and Kincardineshire, by which they might be identified with the red sandstone, containing trilobites, and the fossils of the transition limestone in Gloucestershire and Herefordshire.
  Although I cannot enter fully at present into a discussion of this question, I must here remark, that, after examining the slatyred sandstone, containing trilobites, in Gloucestershire, which is beneath the old red sandstone, as well as the accompanying porphyries and trap rocks, I have satisfied myself that a strong analogy exists between them and the inferior sandstone and trap rocks of Forfarshire; but it is impossible to'oonvey in words to others the identity which may at once he recognized in their general aspect,
  I shall content myself, therefore, by stating, that these strata of shistose, red, and grey sandstone, shale, conglomerate, &c. in Forfarshire, succeed immediately the clay-slate and greywacke, and repose upon them. They will be classed by some geologists with the greywacke; others will regard them as the inferior'member of the old red sandstone. But if, at length, organic remains shall be discovered in them, they may perhaps be referred, like the inferior red sandstone of Gloucestershire and Herefordshire, to the transition limestone series of the English geologists. 
  Mr Weaver has lately informed me that, on the coast of Waterford, between Dungarvan and Tranmore, strata of red and grey micaceous sandy slate, associated with similar quartzose, conglomerates and trap rocks, abound, and they occupy a similar position above the clay-slate. No limestone, with some partial and unimportant enceptions, occurs to the south of the Grampians, on the east side of Scotland, betWeen the clay-slate and the coal.- If, therefore, the inferior micaceous red and (grey sandstones, sometimes slightly calcareous, With their associated strata; and trap rocks, are grouped with the old red sandstone, the latter formation must be regarded as of immense thickness, and as occupying, to the exclusion of the English transition limestone series, the whole space betWeen the clay-slate and the coal. I have considered these observations necessary, lest the strata, with which the serpentine is associated in Forfarshire, should be considered more recent than those in which it has often been found elsewhere. This, I believe, is not the case, though such an idea would be conveyed to most geologists if the red sandstone in question were described as a member of the old red sandstone formation.
  I now hasten to a particular description of the serpentine and accompanying strata, of which the annexed ground plan was sketched on the spot. The Carity, a small river which descends from the micaceous shist district in the northern part of Forfarshire, enters, soon after quitting the Grampians, a deep defile, near the farm of West Balloch, in the parish of large districts may, be examined without the occurrence of a single fossil, yet, in some few places, he has met with some in the red sandstone, corresponding precisely with such as characterize the English transition limestone.
  A thin vein of limestone, corresponding exactly to the corn'stone of the English geologists, is found in the old red ndstone of Strathmore, extending in a direction N. E. and. S. W. from near Stracothro to Careston, and again in the same line at Reedie, a few miles S. W. of Kirriemuir. The cornstone of Forfarshire, like that'in England, contains no organic remains, and is in small quantity, though in consequence of the scarcity of limestone, it has, in many places, been burnt for lime. The trap rocks also, as is well known, contain occasionally much calcareous matter. For an account of the limestone of Clunie, see the First Article, No. I. of this Journal, by Dr MacCnlloch. There is also a stratum of limestone at the Botldin, to the S. of Montrose, which has been long worked, but is now nearly exhausted. Although I have carefully examined this, it may be premature to pronounce an opinion on its geological relations, until it has been compared with some other strata of limestone, occurring near Montrose, which may perhaps belong to the same formation. I am, however, at present inclined to refer the limestone of the Bocldin to an era more recent than the coal.
  Kirriemuir, about half a-mile above the bridge of New Mill, The course of the river then is about N. W. and S. E. cuttingz at right angles the general direction of the strata, The first rock which rises precipitously on both its bankson the northern extremity of the ravine, is an unstratified porphyry, having a base of clay-stone, in which are imbedded crystals of felspar, and hexagonal mica, small particles of quartz, and sometimes spots of soft white talc. Angular fragments-of green foliated talc, undulatingly curved are frequent in it. The rock is of a brownish or purplish red colour, A porphyry, exactly resembling it in character, is seen in a, similar position near Lintrathen, and on the-Isle, near the Falls of the Beekie Linn, also on the North. Esk, where Colonel Imrie has described it. It is sometimes very granitiform, and, in one instance, I found, near Lintrathen, large boulders of it in the field, in which rounded pebbles of granite were imbedded.
This porphyry continues on both sides of the river for several hundred yards, and is seen followed on the left bank by a conglomerate. The relations of the conglomerate with the porphyry are obscurely seen, as the fragments of the decomposing porphyry, fallen from the cliff above, have covered and concealed'the junction, but it is evident, that the edge of the porphyry, as it thins off, overlies a portion of the conglomerate. The conglomerate contains pebbles of quartz and mica, shist in a base of sandstone, sometimes highly ferruginous, sometimes quartzose. Its dip, as far as can be ascertained, is northerly, whereas the sandstone, which immediately follows it, is, inclined in a contrary. direction, at an angle of 41-1 to S. S. E.- The strata must here have suffered great disturbance. The sandstone, for the first twentyv yards approaches to a shale; it is of a deep ferruginous brown colour, fine-grained, and very thinly laminated, being full of minute plates of mica, disposed parallel to the dividing surfaces. The sandstone above mentioned, after extending twenty yards, becomes grayer, and less argillaeeous; it is still thinly, laminated, and dips also to S. E. at an angle of about thirty-five, and, after extending thirty-six yards, is suddenly cut off by the dike of serpentine. 
The side of the dike is composed, on each bank of the river, of a very hard compact rock, about three yards thick, which stands vertically and parallel to the serpentine, forming a parting wall between it and the sandstone. 
This rock consists of equal parts of green serpentine, and an indurated brick-coloured rock, harder than serpentine, and sometimes passing into jasper. It is often very siliceous, and resembles red argillaceous shale, as it is sometimes seen altered by the contact of a trap dike. Small specks of magnetic iron are dispersed through parts of this rock. On the inner side of this rock is seen some layers of contorted sandstone and shale, which must evidently be considered as entangled in the dike. The rock, which is in contact with the shale on the other side, is unseen, owing to an interval of four yards of' deep soil, nor is the interruption supplied by the opposite side of the river. Upon causing the ground to be dug up, they rock, which had decomposed, appeared to have been serpentine. 
Next follows an olive-green serpentine, traversed by innumerable veins of fibrous asbestus. The serpentine, more towards the centre of the dike, becomes dark green or blue; the surface has generally a glazed appearance, much resembling the ordinary green serpentine of the Lizard district in Cornwall, but without a similar admixture of red serpentine. It extends thirty or forty yards. In some places, irregular roundish crystals of serpentine are imbedded in a softer matrix of serpentine. There is much greenish bronze-coloured diallage in the middle of the dike, in which part it precisely resembles the green serpentine with diallage near Coverock. in the Lizard district in Cornwall. Towards the eastern side of the dike, a projecting mass of hypersthene rock, closely resembling some specimens of thatwhich Dr MacCulloch found at Loch Scarvy in Skye, is seen; it does not interrupt the serpentine, but appears inclosed in it. It is occasionally accompanied by some small fragments of talc. Next to the hypersthene, is a light olive-green serpentine, with specks of magnetic iron in parts, which extends four or five yards to the edge of the dike, where sandstone and shale again appear.
  The whole mass of serpentine which I have now described on the left bank, is ninety yards in thickness. It is not stratified, but is shistose on the great scale, dividing, with some degree of regularity, into slabs, if so they may be termed, about two feet in thickness, which are parallel to the sides of the dike, and which are again divided into flattish masses, with wedge-shaped terminations. The direction of the dike is about E. and W., and it is nearly vertical, but with a slight inclination to the W. Where the sandstone and slate, which I have already mentioned, join the eastern extremity of the dike, there is a small interval of decomposed serpentine; but the strata are nevertheless distinctly seen to dip away from the vertical serpentine at an angle of fifty, and, like those on the western side, they are inclined towards the S. S. E. The slaty sandstone is here soft and ferruginous, but it does not present any decided indications of being altered by the contact of the serpentine. Next follows a vertical mass of rock, unconformable to the last mentioned sandstone. It is seven yards or more in thickness, and consists of an indurated siliceous sandstone, much iron-shot, and containing a few quartzose pebbles much charged with iron. The sandstone is traversed by veins of brown spar. Its fracture approaches to conchoidal, and it has every appearance of being an altered rock. In contact with this mass on the other side, serpentine again appears, differing from that which constitutes the great dike from which it is separated by the strata of sandstone and conglomerate already described. This rock is composed of green serpentine and white magnesian carbonate, the latter in smaller proportion. These are blended together so as to form an irregularly striped rock. 
This serpentine is only a foot and a half in thickness, but it appears to have belonged to a mass twenty-five yards or more in thickness, and which has decomposed and left an interruption, at the further extremity of which the serpentine again is seen, having all the same characters, and containing small crystals of quartz of the usual form. On the opposite bank, the soil clearly indicates the decomposition of a similar serpentine, but it has extended there much farther towards the great dike, and may even be connected with it on that side of the river, some angular blocks of greenstone are strewed over part of the space where the dolomitic serpentine has decomposed, from which we may presume that greenstone is 'there associated with the serpentine, of which connection, unfortunately from the want of a section, no distinct knowledge can be obtained.
  To return to the left bank of the river. The dolomitic serpentine“ is flanked'by a vertical mass of sandstone conglomerate, evidently much altered, about five yards thick. Some parts of this rock approach to jasper in fracture and appearance. A remarkable fact was pointed ‘out to me by Professor 'Buckland with regard to this conglomerate. The quartzose pebbles which it incloses are split, and sometimes firmly reunited at an angle by ferruginous matter which abounds in ‘the stratum. The cracks sometimes divide the pebbles into two or more fragments, since cemented together again; sometimes they only penetrate a short way in. 
This phenomenon is the more worthy of notice, as it also presents itself in the conglomerate which flanks alarge dike of greenstone on the Isla in this county. That the conglomerate, however, on the Carity has, in this instance, been altered by the neighbourhood of the dolomitic serpentine, cannot be with certainty affirmed, since the rock, which has been in contact with it on the eastern side, has decomposed, and if greenstone has existed there, the case would only be a parallel one with that above alluded 'to on the’Isla. 
  I have no reason, however, to conclude that there has been greenstone there, for, as far as can be presumed'from the opposite bank, it appears to be sandstone and shale which has wasted away, and left an interval-of forty yards or more.
  Strata of sandstone, shale, and conglomerate, when hardem by their vicinity to trap, generally resist decomposition more than either greenstone or unaltered sandstone. The last rock ' which I shall mention as forming part of the above section exposed on'the banks of the Carity, is a trap dike from thirty to forty yards wide, which has almost entirely decomposed,  and left an interval of argillaceouss Qil.
  This dike is parallel to the great dike of serpentine. When it can be seen, it is composed on the right bank of a well characterized greenstone, sometimes spotted with round specks of white carbonatepf lime, but these not sufficiently numerous to constitute an amygdaloid.
Ontthe left bank some masses appear, in which compact felspar with green earth predominates.
  This dike is flanked on both sides by a vertical and parallel mass of altered rock, probably sandstone and shale. That on the west side of the trap is very hard, and traversed by veins of brown spar, and containing some green earth. It is seen on both sides of the river, as is also the mass on the eastern side of the like, in which mica, quartz, and indurated ferruginous shale appear, and also flesh-coloured foliated brown spar in immense quantities. 
We have now descended the Carity to the point where the section becomes no longer intelligible, and I have described the rocks on the left bank of the river, alluding to those on the right, only, where they might supply an interruption, which, however, they scarcely ever do, since, in each case, decomposition has produced nearly the same deficiencies.
But, in the section on the right bank, there is a want of correspondence in one spot, which deserves our particular notice.
  The great dike of serpentine, after being seen for 90 yards on the bank, instead of coming in contact, as in the opposite bank, with shale and conglomerate, is flanked by a bed of fine grained greenstone, about two feet wide, from the disintegration of which, a hollow has been formed, down which a small descends.
This rock has decomposed into small spheroidal masses, which, in their interior, are of a bluish black colour. Their fracture is conchoidal, and they give out, when breathed upon, a strong argillaceous smell. Their outer coating is of a light green colour, and very hard, and has a tendency, when fractured, to present an irregularly mammillated surface. Entire decomposition of this rock produces bright green and yellow clays.
An excellent account has appeared in the first numberof the Edinburgh Journal ofScience, by Dr MacCulloch, of a dike of greenstone at Clunie, in Perthshire, at whose contact with a bed of limestone, a thin band of serpentine occurs. The author has observed, “that the greenstone, as it approaches the limestone, acquires a finer texture and a laminar structure. The laminae are often intersected by cross fissures, dividing the whole into cuboidal masses, which sometimes decompose still further into spheroidal forms. A regular gradation may be traced from the greenstone to the serpentine, in proportion to its approximation to the limestone.”
  I have visited Clunie, and was much struck with the exact resemblance of the fine-grained rock above mentioned, and that which appears at the edge of the serpentine dike at the West Balloch. I find, however, that all the specimens which I possess of the fine-grained greenstone of Clunie effervesce with acids, which the rock at the Balloch does not. These two cases may be regarded as the converse the one of the other, for the greenstone on the Carity is as insignificant in quantity, when compared to tbe dike of serpentine, as is the vein of serpentine at Clunie when compared to the accompanying greenstone dike. It is much to be regretted, that on the Carity, the rock in contact with the fine-grained greenstone on the side opposite to the serpentine dike, is not seen. I caused a deep trench to be sunk, but did not succeed in rea-ching any rock, though the soil strongly indicated a decomposed serpentine. I think it highly probable, that the variety of serpentine, which has here disappeared, is that which I have already described, into whose composition the magnesian carbonate enters so largely; for a mass of this rock is the first which appears in situ, on this side of the riiver, approaching much nearer to the great dike than any of the dolomitic serpentine on the opposite bank, as the section will explain.
  I have before stated, that, in another place, on the right bank, in an interval left by the decomposition of the dolomitic variety of serpentine, blocks of greenstone indicate clearly the association of that rock with the serpentine. The spot where this occurs, is distant about fifty yards from the thin bed of fine grained greenstone to which I have alluded, and it is a circumstance which confirms my supposition, that the dolomitic variety of serpentine has also been in contact, on one side, with the greenstone at the edge of the great dike, although it has now wasted away and cannot be seen.
  If this conjecture be correct, the association of rock on the Carity becomes still more analogous to that at Clunie; for, in the latter case, are found greenstone, serpentine, and limestone, whereas in the former, we should have greenstone, serpentine, and dolomite.
Although the opposite banks of the Carity, which present us with the sections which we have now considered in detail, are not much more than fifty yards apart, yet they afford, as we have seen, very different appearances, as far as regards the junction of the serpentine with the stratified rocks.
  If we view the left bank alone, we perceive two parallel dikes of serpentine, the first, 90 yards wide, the latter, in which the dolomite abounds, about 25 yards in width. Between these are placed strata of shale and sandstone, highly inclined, as also a vertical mass of conglomerate, much altered and indurated. But if we turn to the right bank, these intervening stratified rocks appear to be entirely wanting; and it seems that the two kinds of serpentine form one dike, a thin bed of fine grained greenstone alone separating them, and another bed of greenstone being also associated 'with the dolomitic serpentine, towards its south-eastern edge.
The phenomena which attend the serpentine at the West Balloch enable us, in the first place, to add another fact in confirmation of the geological connection, already observed to exist, by other geologists, between greenstone and serpentine. We are also presented with examples, more decisive than any I have yet seen described, of stratified rocks affected by their contiguity to serpentine, in a manner exactly similar to that usually observed at their junction with trap dykes. We have also pointed out in one place, a small portion of contorted shale and sandstone, inclosed, and as it were entangled, in the serpentine, as is often found in trap dikes, where they pass in a similar manner through the regular strata. But what is most striking in the general view of the section at the West Balloch, on the left bank of the river, is the fact that, while on each side of the vertical mass of serpentine, the inclined sandstone are cut of and are evidently disturbed, the dike of serpentine itself, pursues its course uninterruptedly, and in a direct line for many miles, both to the eastward and westward.
  If we attempt to follow a course of this dike, we find that the country is deeply buried under gravel which consists chiefly of pebbles of primitive rocks, washed down from the Gram-pians, and that the subjacent strata are only visible at those points where, as at the West Balloch, the strata are intersected by deep amines or dens, as they are called, through which rivers descend, and which they appear, in a great measure, to have worn for themselves.
  The first of these, towards the east, is at the distance of about two miles, at Proson Haugh-yon the Proson, a mile below Pearsie, the seat of Charles Nedderburn, Esq. The blue serpentine there resemblesgthe great dike on the Carity, and contains diallage. Its junction with the regular strata is not seen as it has decomposed much but an altered rock, approaching in its characters to jasper, and traversed by numerous veins of brown spar, crosses the river a short distance above it.
  Rather morethan a mile west from thence, in the same line, the serpentine reappears on the south-east at the bridge of Cortachie. The red slaty sandstone, there seen on its northern side, has a northerly dip, which is a rare occurrence in the strata at the foot of the Grampians, in this district in Scotland.
  I have not yet traced the serpentine farther to the north arrest, but have sought fo it in vain on the North Esk, about fifteen miles in adirect line from the last mentioned locality, Although the section of the rocks on that river, which have been so well described by Colonel Imrie, is complete. There are, however; on the North Esk dikes of greenstone, which cross the  river in the same direction, and nearly in the same  place as the serpentine might be expected to occupy.
  It will now be interesting to return to the Carity, and to trace the serpentine stretchingin an opposite direction towards the W.S. W. After leaving the W. Balloch, it first reapside, in the parish of Kingoldrum. The small burn, in whose channel it is here obscurely exposed, falls afterwards into the Backburn. The rocks, which are there clearly seen associated together, are greenstone, with serpentine, containing much dolomite, and a red indurated rock abounding in Brown spar. A little higher up the burn, as on the Carity, the claystone porphyry appears, which must not be considered as having any connection with the serpentine. If we continue our line to the southswestward for about two miles, we arrive at the ravine through which the Melgum flows, when the serpentine is not recognizable, unless it be considered as represented by the great dike of greenstone which crosses that river immediately below the mill of Shanalaw.
  But I am aware that great caution must be used in the attempt to identify these dikes, as we have seen that there is on the Carity a dike of greenstone parallel to the serpentine. Proceeding about a mile and a half farther, a fine section of the rocks is presented on the precipitous cliffs which rise on each bank of the Isla, a short distance below Peel. There a dike of greenstone crosses the river, possessing for the most part the ordinary characters of that rock, but in some places intermixed with carbonate of lime, and assuming then a finer texture, and appearing not very unlike much of the English black mmpact mountain limestone. Its junction with the strata through which it passes is only seen on its northern side, on the left bank of the Isla, and the phenomena which attend it are exactly analogous to those already described on the Carity. Next to the greenstone is a parallel mass of altered indurated rock, much charged with brown spar, and in parts calcareous, then a mass of conglomerate, in which the quartz pebbles, before alluded to, are split, and reunited by ferruginous matter. Without advancing any theory to account for this curious fact, I may be allowed to say, that the rounded fragments of quartz appear exactly as if they had divided upon being heated, and had only been prevented from flying asunder by the matrix in which they are imbedded. Beyond the conglomerate is sandstone, Very ferruginous, hardened, with a fracture sometimes conchoidal, and traversed by veins of brown-spar. It dips towards the dike, and its stratification becomes obscure in proportion to its proximity to the greenstone. Although no serpentine is seen here, I am informed by Mr Blackadder of Glammis, that, in following the course of the dike through the neighbouring fields, he found blocks of serpentine on the land, from which it appears that that rock is either connected with, or replaces the greenstone.
About three miles farther to the south-west of the last mentioned locality on the Isla, serpentine, like that on the Carity, occurs to the south of Bamff, near Alyth, in Perthshire, the seat of Sir James Ramsay, Bart. The greenstone and serpentine of Clunie, in Perthshire, described by Dr MacCulloch, is only nine miles distant from the last mentioned place, and precisely in the same line. This is certainly a remarkable fact, although not suflicient to lead us to conclude, that the Clunie dike is a prolongation of that which we have been tracing through the country; for no serpentine can be found on the banks of the Erroch, a river which intervenes between Clunie and Bamff, and which, like all the other rivers descending from the Grampians into Strathmore, affords a deep section of the strata.  
  The section of the rocks on the Erroch, ascending from Blairgowrie to the northward of Craig-Hall, differs, in one respect, from any of those, which I have seen between that river and the sea of Stonehaven, or from any that I have examined in the Seedlay Hills, or in the cliffs between Anchmithie and the Red Head. This difference consists in the absence of the inferior fine-grained sandstone, shale, &c. The conglomerate, composed chiefly of rounded masses of trap-porphyries, continues above CraigHall, forming precipitous cliffs, till we arrive nearly opposite East Drummie. There trap rocks succeed, and nothing else appears until opposite the Milltown of Drummie, where greywacke and clay-slate are seen.
  It may be suggested, that the trap, which succeeds the conglomerate, is an overflowing mass, and conceals strata of inferior or transition sandstone. In answer to this, I should state, that we might rather expect greywacke and clay-slate, Were the trap not present. For it is only necessary to consider on the map, the general line of bearing of the inferior or transition sandstone series through Kincardineshire and Forfarshire, at the foot of the Grampians ; and it will appear highly improbable that it exists so far to the north as East Drummie. May we not conclude that the inferior sandstone strata, which have, in all instances, suffered under the influence of that violent action which formed the great conglomerate, have here been completely annihilated. We find almost universafly in two dikes of greenstone which cross the Erroch, both not very far from the line which the serpentine, if continued from Bamff' to Clunie, would take. One of these dikes is rather more than a mile above Blairgowrie. Its thickness is about twenty feet, and the strata of sandstone and shale, in contact with it, are much indurated. The other dike traverses the conglomerate several hundred yards below Craig-Hall.
Whether there exists any connection between the serpentine of Clunie and that on the Carity is uncertain; but it can scarcely be questioned by any who consider the facts above stated, that the same dike of serpentine is found recurring at intervals for the space of at least fourteen miles or more, stretching in a straight line from Cortachie to Bamff, its direction being parallel to the Grampians, and to the outcrop of the several formations which succeed each other in regular order in Forfarshire and Perthshire, from the granite to the old red sandstone. But, notwithstanding this general conformity of direction, the serpentine, wherever it is seen in contact with the stratified rocks, intersects them, and is therefore not of contemporaneous origin, but, like the greenstone with which it is connected, of posterior date.
  Before concluding this communication, I shall take the opportunity of briefly mentioning an instance of the connection of serpentine, greenstone, and sienite, which I examined in the Lizard district in Cornwall, during the last summer, in company with Monsieur Constandt Prevost, a gentleman well known to geologists by his memoirs on several countries on the Continent. This occurs at Cadgwith, near Coverack, and is slightly alluded to by Professor Sedgwick. The serpentine there is the great conglomerate, as well as the superior red sandstone of Forfarshire fragments of the older shale and micaceous sandstone. But although the evidence of the partial destruction of those beds is thus decisive, yet, with the single exception above stated, I have never found them entirely wanting to the eastward, along the foot of the Grampians, nor in the neighbouring Seedlay Hills, where they are more fully developed, and where, with their accompanying trap rocks, they almost exclusively compose that chain. When the conglomerate consists exclusively, or nearly so, of trap Pebbles, as at Craig-Hall, and many other places, we must suppose that, at the epoch of its formation, the inferior sandstone was, in those particular spots, entirely overlaid by trap.  

