THE freshwater limestone which it is now my chief object to describe, differs considerably in the circumstances under which it occurs, from any similar production that has yet been noticed. In order that these circumstances may be fully understood, I shall give a brief geological sketch of that part of the county of Forfar in which the limestone has been discovered.
The county may be regarded as divided into three principal districts; that of the Grampians, that of Strathmore, and that of the Sidlaw Hills. The granite of the Grampians skirts the northern frontiers of the county, and is followed to the south by gneiss, mica-slate, clay-slate, and greywacké, each of these formations in succession occupying a tract of considerable extent, and each observing a north-east and south-west direction. Immediately on the clay-slate rests a series of strata consisting of red and green shale, of gray micaceous and slightly calcareous sandstone, and of red schistose sandstone, this series being subject in all its parts to be interfered with by rocks of the Trap family. This, which I shall call the series of inferior sandstone, has not yet been ascertained to contain organic remains ; but in other leading respects it resembles that assemblage of strata which in England, and particularly in the counties of Hereford, Gloucester, and Monmouth, is so intimately connected with transition limestone. The inferior sandstone dips beneath the old red-sandstone-conglomerate which flanks the Grampians, and emerges again on the south side of the valley of Strathmore, there forming the Sidlaw Chain.
The strata in that chain are disposed saddle-wise; and along the axis or anticlinal line of the saddle, which runs north-east and south-west, the oldest members of the inferior sandstone series are displayed, lying almost horizontally; the newer members of the same series dip away from the axis on either side, with an inclination constantly increasing as they recede from it.
The eastern part of the great valley of Strathmore is composed entirely of old red sandstone. The strata are disposed in a trough, those on the northern side of the anticlinal line of the trough dipping rapidly to the south, and occupying, consequently, a narrower space than the corresponding strata on the southern side, which dip more gradually in an opposite direction. The lowest stratum of the sandstone is a conglomerate, the outcrop of which forms a range of low hills on either side of Strathmore; one range, to which the Alyth hills belong, flanking the,_Grampians ; the other, which comprehends the hills of Finhaven, flanking the Sidlaw. Above’ the conglomerate is a series of red-sandstone strata, which yield an excellent freestone ; and above these are some very argillaceous beds, of a deep ferruginous-red colour, provin-cially termed “calm.”
These two last divisions of the old red-sandstone,_which generally occupy the centre of Strathmore, are often buried beneath vast deposits of gravel, the debris of the various primitive rocks which compose the Grampians, and of the sandstone strata on which the gravel immediately reposes. This debris is of ancient date, and by Professor Buckland would be called “diluvium,” a term by which I shall speak of it in the sequel. 
One of the most considerable of these accumulations ,is in the vicinity of the Bakie. Loch. Its southern boundary is the river Dean, and its northern the road leading from the bridge of Ruthven to Lindertis, and onwards in the direction of Kirriemuir. This diluvial district derives a singular, character from the confused manner in which the debris is heaped up. The eye is struck with the absence of that regular system "of valleys which it is accustomed to trace in hilly tracts. Large hillocks are. seen of sand. and gravel irregularly scattered on all sides, and swampy hollows between these hillocks, from which the waters have no natural drainage. » Some of these hollows are filled by peat; others are occupied by lakes, among which is the Bakie. This loch is situated in the parish of Ayrly, about 9 miles due west of Meigle, and about the same distance northwest of Glammis. A castle of the same name, of which the foundations only now remain, formerly stood on the western bank. The loch once extended over about 200 English acres; and to this area the beds of peat and marl, which occupy its former site, are now confined. It was partially drained about 70 years ago, and has subsequently, at various intervals, been further reduced in level. About 7 years ago it was more completely drained, having for a long time previous been reduced to the statue-of a peat-moss. 
The ancient banks consist entirely of diluvium, which from the structure of the country must extend also beneath the lake: from the thickness, however," of the more recent deposits, this debris ‘has not yet‘ been reached in cutting the deepest drains through the ancient bed of the Bakie. The retention of water in the hollow of the lake is owing to the clay, which is generally blended with the sand and gravel of the diluvium of Strathmore. This mixture, so impervious to water, is provincially termed “mortar.” It is well “displayed in a section at Marcus, below the Bridge of Tannadice, on the South Esk; and was found to constitute the bars of the two great marl-lochs of Logie and Balgavies, when the former was completely, and the latter partially, drained.
  Of late years the Bakie has yielded a supply of marl of much importance to the agriculture of the neighbouring district. This deposit is very variable in thickness in different parts of the lake ; and as it has been worked irregularly, at intervals, by 'different labourers, it is now very difficult to obtain accurate information concerning the manner in which it occurs distributed. The following, however, may be considered as a pretty correct section of the beds, beginning with the uppermost. 
Near the old castle, marl of pure quality has been sunk through of the remarkable thickness of more than I6 feet. In the Loch of Restennet it is said to be equally thick.
The tufisceous limestone or rock-marl is limited to the vicinity of the springs, which occur distributed irregularly over the lake. A small part of it only can ever be examined; since those spots where it is abundant, from its impeding the casting of the shell-marl, are avoided. It belongs to the upper or great bed, if exclusively belonging to either of the two beds of marl ; but this point is uncertain, since in the two following sections, which are the only ones that I succeeded in obtaining, the sand No.3, which usually divides the upper bed of marl from the lower, is wanting.
The shell-marl of the Bakie is white, with a very slight tinge of yellow, and is less mixed with vegetable matter than the marl of other neighbouring lakes; a consequence, probably, of there not being any stream, however small, which enters the lake, and by which foreign matters can be drifted into it. It rarely consists of distinguishable shelly matter in large proportion; and in some parts of the lake, particularly in the vicinity of the springs, is a pure calcareous substance, free from every trace of organization. This latter variety of marl is unctuous when in a moist state; and when dried, it much resembles the softest varieties of chalk, though somewhat more loose and pulverulent. The limestone or rock-marl has the same yellowish tint as the shell-marl. 
  When a stream enters a lake, peat is drifted in, and deposited at the bottom. Thus in the Loch of Forfar, from which shell-marl is annually dredged, the surface is found covered with a thin fluid peat, which it is necessary to begin by removing.
It consists almost wholly of carbonate of lime; is extremely hard and compact, and when broken and viewed with a lens, is in parts decidedly crystalline. Its fracture is fine-grained, slightly splintery, approaching to even when viewed in the great, but uneven when viewed in the small. Many blocks of this substance, which have been exposed for several years, are found to have resisted entirely the action of the frost and the weather. Some of these, which have been built round the great spring, measure 2% feet in length, and above l foot in breadth and thickness. Some masses present a wavy mamillar surface, and resemble stalagmite. Some few have a lamellar texture.
  The‘ rock is traversed vertically by numerous irregular tubular cavities, the sides of which are in general fretted with minute stems and fibres of fossilized vegetables in a very friable state, apparently Chara. Since clusters of these vegetables sometimes occupy the centres of the cavities, they possibly may have occasioned the cavities themselves. I shall notice these cavities more particularly in the sequel, when comparing the tufaceous limestone or rockmarl of the Bakie with ancient freshwater limestone. The flattened concretions of limestone sometimes consist almost entirely of aggregations of fossilized stems of Chara, and in respect of their general composition they do not differ materially from the continuous stratum.
Organic Remains of the Mart.
Quadrupeds.—The remains of quadrupeds are frequently met with in the shell-marl of this lake; but in the tufaceous limestone or rock-marl I have not yet discovered them. The present proprietor has shown me the horns of stags and bulls of large size, taken out of the marl within his memory; and in the Statistical Account of Scotland, vol. ii. p. 213, the horns of a stag, weighing 24 pounds, and the tusk of a wild boar, are mentioned as having been found in the Bakie and -presented to the Society of Antiquaries.
The remains of quadrupeds have also been found in the marl of the neighbouring Loch of Kinnordy, and have been dredged up in some of the marllochs that have not been drained, from the depth of l6 feet below the surface of the water. 
  It is by no means obvious in what manner these animals, which are active in swimming, were lost in lakes of such moderate dimensions as those in question, and became buried in the marl. Mr. Blackadder has suggested, with great appearance of probability, that they were drowned in passing over the lake when frozen, at those points where, owing to the springs, the ice was weakest, and where, as I have previously stated, the marl is produced in the greatest quantity. He has remarked also, that in the winter the marshy borders of the lakes are rendered peculiarly enticing to herbivorous animals; since when the country is buried under snow,’ the aquatic grasses in such situations continue for a long time to present a green surface.
  Crustacea. The Cypris omata (Lamarck) occurs in the limestone, and is the only crustaceous animal that the marly deposits of the Bakie have yet afforded me. The valves only remain; and these, which are semi-calcareous in the living animal, in the marl occur completely fossilized, like the stems of Chara: which accompany them. This Cypris is not uncommon in the lakes and ponds of England. Anotherspecies, the Qypris Faba, is mentioned by Monsieur Brongniart as occurring in an -ancient freshwater formationvin the department of the Allier, in the south-east of France. 
  Testacea.—The following shells are not uncommon in the limestone or rock-marl, and belong (particularly the three first) to the same species which are most abundant in the shell-marl of Forfarshire. 
Many of these shells are very minute, and must have belonged to very young individuals: indeed we rarely meet with full-grown shells in the marl of this country. The shells in the limestone are sometimes empty, but are generally filled with the substance of the matrix, and when taken out, leave a smooth polished mould, as in the older limestones. Sometimes the shells contain crystals of carbonate of lime.
 It is probably in the sites of ancient‘ lakes that the remains of the Irish elk are found, both in Ireland and in that part of the Isle of Man called the Curragh ; since they occur in beds of marl covered by peat. The author of the article on Organic Remains in the Edinburgh Encyclopedia, states that in the Curragh the elks lie within a small space, as if assembled in a herd; that their skeletons are generally entire, in an erect position, and (as the people of the country who dig them out affirm) having the nose elevated as high as possible. The position of the skeletons is the same that we should expect to observe in animals which had sunk in boggy ‘ground, endeavouring to keep the nose aloft as long as possible. Cattle which have thus sunk in’ the bogs of Forfarshire are said to be laired, from the old verb lair, to mire. The skeletons of the great mastodon found in boggy ground near the great Osage river in Louisiana are found in a vertical position, as if they had sunk in the bog. And a skeleton of the same animal lately discovered in New Jersey, about 40 miles to the south of New York, was found in the same position in a stratum of black earth, the head being on a level with the surface. 
  Plants.-—Among the vegetable remains of the limestone is one which proves to be strictly analogous to the Gyrogonite of the ancient : freshwater formations, and which therefore is a subject of much geological interest‘; particularly as many differences of opinion existed among naturalists for a long time concerning the nature of that fossil sand the doubts of some, whether it be really the seed-vessel of a Chara, have not yet been; set at rest. In order, however, not to interrupt with too much detail the course of the present paper, I shall treat of. The Gyrogonites, and of the stems of Charm which accompany them, in an Appendix.
Though frequently not a trace of organization can be discovered in the marl of Forfarshire, yet not a doubt can reasonably be entertained that it is derived from freshwater shells, corresponding in the occasionally total obliteration of its original shelly texture with the white pulverulent marl of Glentilt, described by Dr. MacCulloch, and shown by him to result from land-testacea. In order, therefore, to explain the occurrence of the marl in the lakes of Forfarshire, it is only necessary to account for the accumulation of freshwater shells in those lakes.
  In a paper on the Shell-marl of Scotland, Mr. Warburton has already remarked “ that since shell-marl is not equally common in all the Scotch lakes, it may be worth inquiring what peculiar circumstances have favoured its production ; whether calcareous salts are particularly abundant in the waters that yield it; and what are the rocks from which these waters spring, or which form the sides of the containing basins.” I shall endeavour to throw some light on these leading topics of inquiry.
  On viewing the principal deposits of marl in Forfarshire and in the eastern part of the adjoining county of Perth, it will be found that they do not occur in the districts consisting of granite, gneiss, mica-slate, clay-slate or greywacké, although those districts contain many lakes; but that marl-lakes are frequent in the inferior sandstone, and are not uncommon in the old red-sandstone, and that to these two formations they appear to be strictly confined.
One of the remarkable features in the geology of the county of Forfar is the scarcity of limestone. That substance has been the object of careful search for agricultural uses ; but the only situations in which it has hitherto been discovered are lst, in the districts of gneiss and mica-slate, where it forms some insulated masses: 2dly, in the inferior sandstone and shale, where it is, however, of much rarer occurrence: 3dly, in the old red sandstone, where it appears forming a thin bed of cornstone : lastly, as constituting the limestone of the Boddin near Montrose, which contains for the most part a small proportion of magnesia, and must either be considered as one of the lowest of the coal-measures, lying unconformably on the inferior sandstone series, or perhaps as belonging to the new red-sandstone formation. Lime, however, enters pretty extensively as an ingredient into the rocks of the two sandstone formations in which marl-lakes occur ; both the old red and the inferior sandstone, as well as some of the trap-rocks which interrupt the regularity of the latter, containing a notable proportion of carbonate of lime. The rock seen on the surface in situ the nearest to the Bakie is the freestone of Lindertis, about a mile distant. It is a red-sandstone, slightly conglomeritic, containing a small proportion of carbonate of lime.
Concerning the water of the Bakie, I have already stated that no stream enters the lake; but it is fed by numerous springs, which burst up from the bottom in different parts, and are probably deep-sited, as they never fail in the longest droughts. I am indebted to Dr. Daubeny, Prof. Chem. Ox., for an examination of the water of the principal spring, which he finds remarkably pure and exempt from mineral contents, and in no way justifying the reputation it has acquired of possessing medicinal qualities. The specific gravity exceeds that of distilled water by less than T-5-th part, and when evaporated in an exhausted receiver it bears only T-4-th of residuum. This residuum consists chiefly of dark-coloured vegetable matter; but it must also contain lime, since oxalate of ammonia renders the water turbid. The presence of carbonic acid is very evident.
  It appears probable, therefore, that when the lake existed as such, the springs were the medium through which a continued supply of lime was secured for the perpetual growth and renewal of the testacea. The Chara: and other water-plants which are known to contain lime, are probably, the instruments by which in the first instance that earth is secreted from the water; and from these plants, through the medium of food, it passes into the testacea. Accordingly, unless there are springs, a lake does not produce marl in any quantity, even though the lake be situated in one of the sandstone districts most favourable to its production. The growth of testacea, in such cases, is necessarily very limited, and their exuviaa cease to accumulate; because it is only from the decomposition of the exuvim of a former race that the waterplants can obtain the lime which is requisite for their own support, and ultimately for the growth of a new race of testacea. In conformity with these views, we find that it is always near the springs that the marl is in the greatest quantity; because it is near to them that the testacea delight to congregate, partly owing to the greater clearness of the water, but principally to its uniform temperature, which occasions the water-plants to vegetate there in the very depth of winter. For the marl to be abundant, the springs must be copious; for it to be pure, the lake must be clear and free from muddy sediment; and must be fed therefore not by rivers, but by springs, as is the case with the Loch of Bakie.
On the Origin of the Tufaceous Limestone or Rock-marl. 
  The origin of the limestone or rock-marl appears to admit of only two reasonable explanations. lst, It may be regarded as a tufaceous deposit from the springs in the bottom of the lake, which quitting their sources surcharged with carbonate of lime, on mixing with the water of the lake deposited that surcharge. As the tufas deposited in the open air from petrifying springs include terrestrial and aquatic plants and shells, so would tufa, formed, as upon our hypothesis, underwater, be found to envelope the native plants and testacea of the lake. But however natural this hypothesis may appear, the particular circumstances of the case do not warrant our adopting it; for the springs, instead of being surcharged with lime, contain only a small proportion of that earth; and consequently neither do they now, that the lake is drained, form a calcareous precipitate around their sources; nor can they have (lone so formerly at the bottom of the lake, before it was drained; unless (which is highly improbable) at some former period they contained lime in solution more copiously than at present. It is unnecessary therefore to dwell upon this hypothesis. We ought the more readily to discard it, because, although the springs in Forfarshire and the adjoining part of Perthshire contain an abundance of carbonic acid, they have not yet any where, except in connexion with shellmarl, been observed to deposit tufa.
I have already stated that it is only near the springs that the rock-marl is found ; that where it occurs, shell-marl has always hitherto been found beneath it, and that the water of the springs contains carbonic acid. May we not then reasonably suppose that this carbonated water, in percolating the lowest deposits of shell-marl, took up from them a portion of lime; and on mixing with the water of the lake at a further distance from the source, let fall a calcareous precipitate, which in some places falling alone, produced a pure crystalline limestone, and in others, mixing with the later deposits of shell-marl and the various lacustrine plants, had the effect of cementing them together into one tufaceous mass.
The only other instance that has come to my knowledge in this part of Scotland of a limestone similar in character and in the circumstances of its occurrence to that of the Bakie, is in the moss of Cookstone, near the Bakie, and like that loch, occupying one of the hollows between hillocks of diluvium. For this piece of information I am indebted to Mr. Blackadder of Glammis, a gentleman well skilled in every branch of geological research. An inconsiderable quantity was discovered in cutting peat; but nothing further can at present be ascertained respecting it. If a similar rock has been found in any other marl-loch, it is probably in very small quantity ; for marl is so extensively worked in this part of Scotland, that were there any considerable mass of the substance in question, it could scarcely have escaped observation. A formation, however, is now daily going on in the Loch of Forfar, which, though not strictly analogous to that of the Bakie and of Cookstone, may still tend to throw some light on the subject. For the first intimation of the existence of this formation I am also indebted to Mr. Blackadder. 
  Tufa in the Loch of Forfar.—-The Loch of Forfar was never more than partially drained; and the marl can only be procured there by dredging it from the bottom. When the level of the lake was first lowered, a bed of shellmarl of very pure quality was left dry on its southern bank, some of which, being too thin to be worth working, still remains there. It has been since buried by the falling in of some of the diluvial gravel of the bank above, part of which has also covered the bottom of the lake near the shore. The water, when the lake is very full, or the wind high, washes the edge of the bed of marl in thebank, and becomes milky from the quantity of calcareous matter suspended in it. From this fluid a deposit is constantly taking place, and a thin crust of calcareous tufa, which scarcely ever attains the thickness of an inch and a half, falling on the gravel, cements it together, and forms a breccia. It occasionally incloses a few shells, chiefly of the Helix peregra. These have been washed out of the soft marl, which itself contains but few of them. This formation extends for about 100 yards along the southern border of the lake, and is confined to that part which in summer is dry, and in winter lies below the level of the water.
Comparison of the Limestone of the Bakie with other Freshwater Limestones both of recent and of ancient Formation. 
 The limestone of the Bakie very closely resembles the tufa deposited from springs, which issuing highly charged with carbonic acid or sulphuretted hydrogen from limestone strata, contain a quantity of lime in solution. Such deposits are common in most calcareous districts; but are particularly abundant in some parts of Italy; as, for instance, at the waterfall of Terni, and at the baths of St. Philip on the frontiers of Tuscany some miles from Radicofani, and near Rome at the cascade of Tivoli and the lakes of Tartari and Solfatarra. The tufa of the last-mentioned lake is compact, and in that respect comes nearest to the ancient freshwater limestone of the same country. 
The modern deposit however-, the most analogous to that of the Bakie, is that described by M. Beudant, as daily forming underwater at Czegled and other places in the great plain of Hungary. The limestone thus produced is of a grayish or yellowish colour, divides naturally into slabs, and is sometimes sufficiently solid to serve for building. It incloses Planorbes and other shells identical with those now living in the neighbouring marshes. It is traversed by irregular tubes which are perpendicular to the surfaces of the slabs ; and are considered by M. Beudant as having been caused by the disengagement of gas. 
  Of the ancient freshwater limestones, the most similar to the rock-marl of the Bakie are those of Italy. This kind of limestone, having been quarried extensively by the Romans near Tivoli, (Tibur,) has acquired in Italy the name of Travertino (lapis Tiburtinus), a term now applied also to modern tufa and to any very soft and cavernous limestone. The travertino is white when first taken from the quarry; but after a time it becomes yellowish, and at length acquires that reddish hue which is so agreeable to the eye, and so much heightens the architectural effect of the monuments of ancient Rome. It is the material, in fact, of which not only the Coliseum and many other ancient works in Rome are constructed, but also the far older temples in the Grecian colony of Paastum.
The travertino of the great quarries of Ponte Lucano, at the foot of the hills of Tivoli, is described by Von Buch as lying in horizontal beds, and as being principally characterized by the cavities which traverse its substance. “These cavities,” he observes, “are of two kinds: the former, small, lengthened, dull in the interior, and often inclosing vegetable remains, by which they seem to have been occasioned; the latter, very long, passing from the top to the bottom, and so parallel to one another as to appear artificial.” These cavities are considered by M. Brongniart as of invariable occurrence in the freshwater limestones of all countries, and as absolutely characteristic of such formations. Similar cavities were noticed by M. Omalius d’Halloy in the travertino near Cisterne, at the entrance of the Pontine Marshes, on the road from Rome to Naples; and he also observed the occurrence of Lymneaa and Helices in the rock. The freshwater formation of the valley of the Elza, in Tuscany, towards Colle, is described by M. Brongniart as presenting, lst, upon the heights, as you descend towards the valley, a very compact limestone of great extent and thickness : 2d, at a lower level, a fine sand, inclosing Neritae which retain their colour, and a multitude of other freshwater shells : 3d, on descending the valley, a stratum, which consists either of compact limestone traversed by sinuous cavities, and containing freshwater shells and flinty portions that gradually pass into the matrix; or of a porous rock resembling tufa, composed apparently of the stems of Chara and Myriophyllum converted into limestone. 
There is scarcely more than one circumstance in this description (and to that one I shall recur in the sequel) to which a parallel cannot be found in the deposits of the Bakie. Nor ought the resemblance which the ancient travertino bears, in common with modern tufa, to the rock-marl of the Bakie, to be thought surprising, when we consider what the origin of the former has been, in the opinion of the most able geologists. It is regarded by them as a deposit which has been formed, at periods more or less remote, in the natural hollows of lakes ; the extent of those lakes being in some cases yet assignable; and the supply of the calcareous matter which formed the deposit, has been traced by them to springs or streams which existing in the very districts in question, still precipitate tufa. Thus M. Omalius d’Halloy considers the plain of Ponte Lucano, between Rome and Tivoli, as the site of a lake which has become filled up with beds of travertino; and the small lakes of Tartari and Solfatarra, which still deposit tufa, as the remains of this ancient expanse of waters. In the same manner, nearly, M. Brongniart traces the origin of the hills of travertino which bound the valley of the Elza in Tuscany, to rivulets actually existing which still deposit tufa, and which, before the surface was modified by the diluvian excavation of that valley, flowed out and deposited tufa on a level with the summits of thosehills. 
  In their Essay on the Geology of the Environs of Paris (p. 56), MM.Cuvier and Brongniart state, that they regard the freshwater strata of that country as deposits formed in an immense freshwater lake; and they infer from the character of those deposits, that the freshwater of the ancient world possessed properties which are not observed in that of our modern lakes : in the latter we find deposits of friable mud only ; but in the lakes of ancient date there were formed thick, and often very homogeneous, deposits of yellowish compact limestone, of whitish marl, and of flint, which have enveloped the remains of the living inhabitants of the lakes, and have converted the original substance of those remains into that of the calcareous or siliceous matrix which surrounds them.
  Of the four particulars here enumerated as establishing a distinction between the deposits of ancient and modern lakes, no less than three are supplied by the marl-loch of the Bakie ; since, lst, we have a very compact limestone, crystalline in parts ; 2d, extensive deposits of white and yellowish calcareous marl, in which testaceous remains are only of casual occurrence ; 3d, vegetable remains wholly converted into limestone. The only characteristic peculiarity to be noticed in recent lacustrine deposits, not excepting those of the Bakie, wherein they fail to preserve their analogy to the ancient ones, is the non-occurrence in the former of flint, either nodular, like that imbedded in the travertino of the Elza, or stratiform, like that presented in the siliceous and calcareo-siliceous beds of the basin of Paris. Except in thermal waters, decidedly under the influence and in the proximity of volcanos, no aqueous deposits of silex have been seen in the act of forming: M. Brongniart therefore conjectures, with some appearance of probability, that the silex of ancient freshwater formations was precipitated where we now find it, from the water of thermal springs.
  On the many other analogies which the deposits of the Bakie, in common with most other recent lacustrine deposits, bear to those of ancient lakes, it is not my intention to dwell. It is well known that ancient freshwater deposits in many cases consist almost wholly of loose materials, such as marl, clay, and sand, either disposedin alternating layers, or variously blended with one another; and such also are the principal contents of the Bakie, and the entire contents of most of the marl-lochs in Forfarshire. Between the aquatic. plants and animals of the two epochs the closest relation subsists, the genera in the two cases being nearly identical. Thus we find in both formations: among the Testacea,—Lymneaa, Planorbes, &c. ; among the Crustacea,—the genus Cypris; and among the plants,-the genus Chara, with its fossilized seed-vessel the Gyrogonite. Even between the terrestrial animals of the two epochs the relation does not wholly fail ; since in both instances, imbedded in the deposits, occur the remains of large Mammalia. Nor is the magnitude of the ancient freshwater lakes without a parallel among recent formations, although the modern process of deposition may in most instances, either from a reduced scale of temperature or from the smaller dimensions of the present race of testacea, be comparatively slow. Thus the surface of Lake Superior alone is half as large again as the area of the three tertiary basins of Paris, London and Hampshire united, of which basins only very limited portions are occupied by freshwater deposits; and the same lake is considerably greater than the great tertiary basin of the south of France. That these American lakes are forming deposits, and the nature of the deposits so formed, we fortunately are enabled to ascertain, in consequence of the subsidence of the waters of Lakes Superior and Huron, occasioned by the partial destruction of their barriers. These deposits may be traced along their present shores: on Lake Superior they consist of clay, sand and gravel; and on Lake Huron, below beds of sand 150 feet thick, we have similar beds of clay, inclosing shells of the very species which inhabit the lake, and which are of great size and thickness. 
On several other Recent Deposits of Freshwater Iklarl.
Having now terminated my description of the freshwater deposits of the Bakie, I shall give a brief account of some other deposits of marl with which I am acquainted. 
I. Marl of the Loch of Kinnordy. 
The Loch of Kinnordy lies in the same geological district with the Bakie, about 6 miles to the north-west of it. It is closed up at its bar by a mass in situ of those red argillaceous beds, belonging to the old red-sandstone, termed calm.
The marl, before it was worked out, was thickest at the west end of the lake, where the springs are most numerous. It is usually divided into two beds by an intervening layer of clay, from l to 2 feet thick. The upper bed abounds in shells, of the very same species that occur in the Bakie ; and these shells, like those of the Bakie, are the growth of young testacea, scarcely one in ten being full-sized. In the lower bed the shells have disappeared; or if any exist, they are very rare. In this bed the seed-vessels of Chara are abundant. In those specimens which I have found, belonging to Chara hispida, the outer integument is not fossilized, as it is in those enveloped by the rock-marl of the Bakie; though still it is more calcareous than in the living plant. The nut is always found within, black and much shrunk from decay. The marl from both the beds is argillaceous, and contains a less percentage of lime than most of that from the Bakie. Scales of mica are frequent in it, and it is usually divisible into thin lamina, between which the flattened stems of vegetables occur in great abundance.
The clay which separates the two beds of marl is generally reddish, and has been derived, apparently, from the calm. Like the marl, it divides into thin leaves. From this texture, I am disposed to believe that it was deposited gradually, and not that it resulted from a single influx of mud. While the clayey matter remained suspended in the water, the testacea must have been unable to live; and this may not improbably be the cause why the clay contains neither shells nor calcareous matter.
  In the upper bed of marl, during the last autumn, the skeleton of a stag (Cervus elaphus) of large dimensions was dug out. The horns had 9 branches, and weighed, when dry, nearly I8 pounds. The skeleton was in a vertical position; the tips of the horns reaching nearly to the surface of the marl, and the feet nearly two yards below. The marl was immediately covered by peat, in which also the skeletons of stags are occasionally discovered. Since the bones of quadrupeds are frequently met with in the marl by the workmen, much knowledge may be obtained of the former post-diluvian wild inhabitants of this country, by paying to the subject that attention which it deserves.
In the summer of 1820 a canoe was found in the peat, one extremity being scarcely below the surface [see Pl. X. fig.2.]. It was formed out of a single block of oak; its length from head to stern was 15 feet, its width within 3 feet. There were no marks of thowels or row-locks on the sides for rowing ; so that it appears to have been paddled like acanoe, which it resembled in form. There is a seat for the boatman near the stern. The prow had evidently been carved into an ornamental shape, representing, apparently, the head of some animal. The stem was the only part that had suffered injury. This relict is not without its value to the Geologist, as well as to the Antiquarian ; since it shows that some part even of the peat, which overlies all the marl, is of a date anterior to the historical records of the country.
II. Marl near Romsey in Hampshire.
The meadows near Greatbridge, about a mile north of Romsey in Hampshire, afford the only locality in England where I have as yet seen shell-marl. It has been applied there to agriculture for many years with advantage. It occupies an alluvial tract in the valley of denudation through which the river Test flows, traversing the plastic clay formation, near the northern confines of the tertiary basin of Hampshire and the lsle of Wight. The following is a section of one of the above-mentioned deposits in Ashley Meads, beginning at the top.
 The chief substance of the marl consists frequently of shells; sometimes, however, about one half of it is a calcareous matter, which often forms concretionary balls of some solidity; these however fall to pieces immediately upon exposure to the air and frost. These concretions bear no resemblance to the rock-marl of the Bakie. They are never compact, but of a loose texture and brownish yellow colour; they contain some iron. These and all the accompanying marls when heated afford a considerable quantity of ammonia, with a smell of burnt animal matter. I am obliged to J. E. Gray, Esq., F.G.S., of the British Museum, for the names of the following shells found in this marl. 

  In the marl occur branches and trunks of trees but little altered, and frequently encircled with whitish calcareous concretions, several inches thick, consisting of the same substance as the nodules before mentioned. Both in the marl and peat have been found the bones of many animals. Mr. Daman of Romsey has formed a collection of some of these remains, among which Professor Buckland recognised the bones of the stag, roebuck, beaver, pig, and ox. Springs are common in these alluvial tracts. The marl occupies irregular spaces, surrounded, and often abruptly terminated, by peat. The spots in which it is found are usually elevated some feet above the level of the alluvial flat of the Test, and are called by the workmen, from that circumstance, “malm-lmolls.” There are places where the marl is overlaid by peat, and where the two are intermixed, forming what the workmen call black malm and white peat.
  Of these facts the following explanation may be offered.—The low grounds by the side of the Test were first covered by peat, which the river occasionally overflowed, carrying with it drift timber and the bones of such animals as by different casualties had perished in the water or within reach of floods. In different parts of these marshes, however, there remained pools of still water, in which freshwater testacea subsisted. The numerous land-shells which are found mixed with the aquatic species, belonged to testacea inhabiting the borders of the river, which, when high, still passed into these lakes, and drifted in occasionally, together with the shells, the wood and peat now sometimes found intermixed with the marl. At length the basin was filled up with shell-marl ; testacea could no longer exist there; and in some places a small increase of peat took place on the surface of the marl. Lastly, the river covered in some parts (as at Ashley Meads) both the marl and the peat with alluvial clay, without any admixture of shells or of marly matter. This last operation was in all probability the result of several floods, during which the waters rested some time on these flats ; so that the argillaceous sediment sometimes attained the thickness before mentioned. To account for the present elevation of the marl above the banks of the pools in which it was formed,
Mr. Daman suggests, that the peat when no longer on the increase, after being covered by clay, would shrink considerably; while the marl would not contract,—-or if at all, not in the same proportion. The author of this memoir has himself had occasion to witness, in the moss of Kinnordy in Forfarshire, the remarkable degree in which peat shrinks, when the quantity of its water is diminished. In that Moss, the peat, since its drainage, has in many parts lost by subsidence half its original thickness.
The Test flows more rapidly than most of the rivers in the South of England. Its water is very clear, and remains so during the highest floods. From its sources to the north of VVhitchurch and Andover, until it arrives near Brook, about four miles and a half above Ashley Meads, where the marl occurs, it flows through a districtof chalk. After leaving the chalk, it enters the plastic clay formation. In the muddy deposits formed in the slow-running parts of the river, the exuviaa of testacea are very abundant. The river is not known to deposit calcareous matter any where at present, either in its channel, in the ditches and drains, or in the meadows, during floods. Calcareous marly matter has never yet been found in this neighbourhood unaccompanied by shells.



