
  It has long been known that near Norwich the horizontal beds of flint nodules in the white chalk are crossed by perpendicular rows of much larger flints, often several yards in height. These larger and vertical flints are provincially called potstones, and are the same as those which occur in the chalk of Ireland, and are described by Dr. Buckland under the name of paramoudra. At a place called the Grove’s End House, near Horsted, about six miles from Norwich, an excavation has been made, from 15 to 20 yards wide, and nearly half a mile in length, through 26 feet of white chalk, covered by strata of sand, loam, and shelly gravel, about 20 feet thick. In the chalk thus intersected, the rows of potstones are remarkable for their number and continuity; it is affirmed by those who for more than twenty years have superintendcd the cutting of the canal, that every row of upright flints has been found to extend from the top to the bottom of the chalk, so far as the excavation has been carried downwards. The rows occur at irregular distances from each other, usually from 20 to 30 feet apart, and they are not portions of continuous siliceous beds in a vertical position, but piles of single flints running through the chalk, like so many wooden stakes driven into mud. Few of the separate flints are symmetrical, but some are pear-shaped. They are very unequal in size—usually from a foot to three feet in their longest diameter. At the point of intersection between a row of potstones and one of the horizontal beds of flints, there is no mutual interruption or shifting, but they are united as if both were formed at one time. Each potstone is not siliceous throughout, like the nodules of flint in the horizontal beds, but contains invariably within it a cylindrical nucleus of chalk, which, when deprived of its siliceous envelope, has the form and smooth surface of a tree when stripped of its bark. This internal mass of chalk is much harder than the ordinary chalk surrounding the fiints, and does not fall to pieces when exp0sed to frost: it penetrates the flinty covering at the top and bottom of each potstone. A ventriculite was observed in the chalky nucleus in one instance. The author concluded by inviting those geologists who resided near Norwich to examine these phenomena more minutely ; and adverting to the late discoveries of Ehrenberg, declared his expectation that the origin both of the vertical and horizontal masses of flint would be found to be intimately connected with the fossil remains of Infusoria, sponges, and other organic beings.

