

Mr John Cunningham, F.G.S. , in the year 1839, read a paper before the Geological Society on Impressions and Casts of Props of Rain discovered in the Quarries of Lower New Red Sandstone at Storeton Hill, Cheshire. After he had inferred their pluvial origin, he pointed out the indentations on the spot to Dr Buckland, who recognized the correctness of his interpretation. 

When, in 1841, I visited the quarries of new red sandstone at Newark, in New Jersey, in company with Mr W. C. Redfield of New York, we observed some very distinct rain-prints on ripple-marked shales. Afterwards, in 1842, I saw similar impressions of recent date, which had been made between high and low water mark, on the red sand and mud bordering the Basin of Mines, in the Bay of Fundy. Since that period I have been enabled to form a collection of specimens of this mud, hardened in the sun, through the kindness of Dr Webster of Kentville, to which I shall presently allude. In 1843, Mr Redfield, in a letter to the author which was read to this Society, stated that he had found impressions of rain-drops in another 
locality of the new red sandstone called Pompton, in New Jersey, twenty-five miles from Now York ; and in the same year he published in Silliman's Journal an account of the sandstone strata of that place, and of the Ichthyolites contained in them. In these beds, many of which are frequently ripple-marked, and which exhibit the footprints of birds, shrinkage cracks are seen, together with fossil impressions and casts of rain-drops and of hail. 

Early in the present year I received from Mr Richard Brown some fine specimens of rain marks from the greenish shales of the coal measures of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, to which he has made a passing allusion in his excellent description of the Sydney coal-field, in our Quarterly Journal. A comparison of all these specimens has convinced me that the impressions of triassic and carboniferous date above mentioned, have been correctly referred to the action of rain, and that they are distinguishable from such cavities as are sometimes made by the rising of air-bubbles through mud or sand, with which Mr Desor, in a memoir recently published, has declared many, if not all, the supposed fossil rain marks to have been confounded.

