
The discovery by MM. Deslongchamps and Tesson of fossil shells of the genus Conus, in the lias of Normandy, in 1837 has by no means attracted the attention it deserves, either in France or in this country. The fact, indeed, has remained almost unknown, a brief notice of the fossils, unaccompanied by figures or a specific description, having alone appeared in a report of a meeting held in 1837, by the Linnaean Society of Normandy. 

Although fossil shells belonging to Lamarck's family of the Enroules are sufficiently abundant in the tertiary strata, a very few examples have yet been recorded of the occurrence of any of these shells in any of the more ancient fossiliferous rocks. The Enroules of Lamarck comprise the genera Ovula, Cypiwa, Terebellum, Ancillaria, Oliva, and Conus. Of these, the only examples known to me in secondary formations, are a species of Cypraa, which I have mentioned and figured in the Geol. Trans. (2nd Series, vol. v. p. 243.) as occurring in the upper chalk of Faxoe in Denmark, and a Cone called C. luberculatus, of which a single specimen was found by M. Dujardin in the chalk near Tours, of which he has given a figure in les Mem. de la Soc. Geol. de France, torn. ii. deuxieme partie, 1837. Plate 17- p. 232. 

I was greatly surprised, therefore, during my late visit to Caen (June, 1840) to see in the cabinets both of Prof. Deslongchamps and M. Tesson, several specimens of Cones which they told me had been discovered in the Has of La Fontaine-Etoupe-four, about six miles south of Caen. We find it stated in the report before alluded to, that M. Deslongchamps had found in the Commune of Bretteville sur Laize, three species of Cones in the lias, and that M. Tesson had afterwards found a fourth and more perfect individual of the same genus in the quarries of Fontaine-Etoupe-four not far from the locality before-mentioned. In both these places the lias is described as resting on the quartzose sandstone of the transition formation (terrain intermediate). Two of these specimens only retained the shell itself, the others were casts. (See Figures.) 

In order to satisfy myself of the correctness of the alleged geological position of these Cones, I visited in June, 1840, Fontaine-Etoupe-four in company with M. Deslongchamps, and ascertained to my full satisfaction that the rock from which the Cones had been extracted was full of Ammonites, Pleurotomaria and other fossils, which must belong either to some member of the inferior oolite or upper lias. 

The fundamental rock consists of highly inclined vertical, and in some places curved, beds of reddish and white quartzite, alternating with greenish talcose schists. Upon these ancient rocks the brown fossiliferous limestone rests unconformably and in horizontal stratification. At many points are seen at the contact deep rents traversing the inferior quartzose rock, which have been filled from above with rubbish, consisting of angular fragments of quartzite, pieces of limestone, and numerous fossil shells, the whole imbedded in a calcareous matrix resembling that of the incumbent strata. The most perfect fossils, together with the greater part of the Cones, have been all found in this breccia filling the rents, and the upper parts of the breccia unite with the lowest strata of fossiliferous limestone in such a manner as to make it clear that the fissures were filled before or at the time of the deposition of the lowest strata of the limestone. The quarries in which these sections are exposed have been opened, not for 
the sake of the limestone but for the subjacent quartzite which is used for making roads, and which at some points comes up nearly to the surface. This quartzite, however, and the accompanying transition schist, are only found at a moderate depth along a certain line from N.N.W. to S.S.E., in which direction they form an underground ridge stretching for many leagues beneath the platform of limestone. At the distance of a few yards either east or west of this narrow ridge the incumbent oolite or lias is of such thickness that the quartzose stone cannot be worked with profit. 

Among the Ammonites which I collected myself in the rent or in the bed immediately covering it, or which were given me from this locality by M. Deslongchamps, were the following, which have been examined by my friend Mr. Lonsdale, of the Geological Society. 

Among many others which were shown me at Caen and named by M. Deslongchamps, were Ammonites planicosta and A. Bucklandii, which occur in the Has in England, A.falcifer, found in the alum shale near Cheltenham, and A, Strangwaysii and A. Murchisonce, both from the inferior oolite of England. Associated with these I saw a Belemnite, several species of Pleurotomaria, fragments of a.Pentacrinite and other fossils, which in the opinion of M. Deslongchamps indicates that the formation constitutes either the upper member of the lias, or is intermediate between the lias and the inferior oolite. 

It may be objected that the mineral character and colour both of the breccia filling the rent and of the overlying beds differ totally from those of ordinary lias, for the rock is a pale brown ferruginous limestone. But Mr. Lonsdale informs me that near Radstock the great deposit of blue lias is represented by only a few feet of a pale brown granular rock, so like inferior oolite that the quarry men apply the same name to it. But this gritty lias is clearly not inferior oolite, being separated from that rock by blue clay from 100 to 200 feet thick. The "corn-grit" above-mentioned is a granular light brown limestone, but of a closer and finer grain than the gritty lias. Yet Radstock is only seven miles S.W. from Bath, where the lias is well-developed, with its usual characters. 

In proceeding from Caen to Fontaine-Etoupe-four the geologist obtains no sections which display the superposition of the different members of the oolitic series, but he finds the white oolite of Caen give place to the ferruginous oolite of Eterville, which resembles in appearance the oolite of Dundry. Travelling still further south he meets with the beds of Fontaine-Etoupe-four already described. As all these formations appear to be everywhere horizontal, and the surface of the country, following the direction above-described, is constantly attaining a higher level, we might naturally have expected to reach newer instead of older beds. But it must be remembered, that a slight dip, and one quite inappreciable in the space of a quarry, as for example, an angle of five degrees, might in a distance of six miles cause a difference of level of more than 800 feet, so as to allow beds which may be concealed beneath the oolite building-stone at Caen to crop out in a high platform at Fontaine-Etoupe-four. 



