UNTIL my recent visit to Auvergne in 1843,1 was never able to hear of the discovery of any fossils so connected with the most modern class of volcanic cones and currents of lava, as to enable us to assign to them any other than a very indefinite geological date. But when in the course of my last tour I inquired of the Abbé Croizet, well known as an eminent comparative osteologist, if he had yet found any fossil bones or shells in gravel lying immediately under the newest lava-streams, he replied that he had recently met with a great number of mammiferous remains at Nechers, in a bed of reddish sandy clay, which rested against the side of the long and narrow coulée which has issued from the Puy de Tartaret. This hill, as the readers of Scrope’s ‘ Geology of Auvergne ’ will remember, is one which, by its position in the bottom of a valley at the lower end of the Lac de Chambon, and by the integrity of its heap of loose scoriœ, has all the characters belonging to the class of most modern cones, those which have been least altered by time. The lava issuing from it forms a narrow stripe, occupying for more than thirteen miles the bottom of the valley in which the river Couze de Chambon flows, and at length terminating at the small town of Nechers, about six miles north-west of Issoire. At a short distance above the end of the current in the suburbs of the town, the lava at its side presents a steep and often perpendicular face, twenty-five feet in height towards the river, a meadow only intervening between it and the banks of the Couze. Most of the bones of fossil quadrupeds had been found in a superficial deposit of red sandy clay in this meadow; but on closely examining the spot in company with M. Bravard the palaeontologist, and with M. Croizet, I became convinced, and both these gentlemen are now of the same opinion, that the deposit in question passed continuously under the lava, containing beneath it the same fossils as in the meadow. This fact was made clear by a cave serving as a wine-cellar excavated artificially under the lava; and it has since been more completely established by the investigations of M. Bravard, who will, I believe, soon publish an account of several sections and of the fossil remains. I have little doubt that the current of lava itself once extended farther northwards towards the river, and covered part of the bone-bed which is now exposed. The only fossils which I collected on the spot consisted of the jaw and teeth of a species of Arvicola, and the molar of a horse, which Mr. Owen has since examined, and remarks that it agrees precisely with the third lower molar of his Equus fossilis from the caves of Oreston; showing the same difference from the corresponding tooth in the recent horse in its narrower transverse diameter, which he has figured in his ‘ British Fossil Mammalia’. The other species found in the same argillaceous sandy bed are referable to the genera Sus, Bos, Cervus, Felis, Cams, Martes, Talpa, Sorex, Lepus, Sciurus, Mus and Lago- mys. The bones also of a frog, snake and lizard, and of several birds are associated: in all no less than forty-three species have been brought to light, all closely allied to recent animals, yet nearly all of them, according to M. Bravard, showing some points of difference, like those which Mr. Owen discovered in the case of the horse above alluded to. Several recent land-shells, such as Cyclostoma elegans, Helix kortensis, H. nemoralis, H. lapicida, Clausilia rugosa, and others, accompanied the bones. M. Croizet has also mentioned to me the horns of a reindeer found in the meadow. It is highly probable that these animals may have been drowned by floods which accompanied the earthquakes and eruptions by which the Puy de Tartaret was formed: at all events, we may affirm that they belong to the alluvial formations of the river-bed and river-plain which existed at the time of the flowing of the lava of Tartaret, and they consequently give an exceedingly modern geological date to that lava, though we must still infer, that the current was produced at an era when the mammiferous fauna was very distinct as a whole from that now inhabiting Auvergne.
   That the current which has issued from the Puy de Tartaret may nevertheless be very ancient, in reference to the events of human history, we may conclude from the fact, that a Roman bridge of such form and construction as continued in use down to the fifth century, but which may be older, is now seen at a place about a mile and a half from St. Nectaire. This ancient bridge spans the river Couze with two arches, each about fourteen feet wide. These arches spring from the lava on both banks, showing that a ravine precisely like that now existing had already been excavated by the river thirteen or fourteen centuries ago. The bridge is still in use, but the arch on the right side of the river has been half blocked up by the fall of masses of lava from the cliff above. On the whole, therefore, if we take the Puy de Tartaret and its lava as a type of the products of the most modern volcanoes of Auvergne, we may infer, from the facts above described, that the latest eruptions occurred at the close of the Newer Pliocene, if not in the Post-pliocene period, or when the mollusca were identical with those now living, although a great many of the mammalia belonged to species now extinct.
   In the accompanying section I have shown at the north-west extremity the position occupied in the valley of the Couze at Nechers by the lava of Tartaret, No. 10, and subjacent bone-bed No. 9. I have at the same time shown, in the prolongation of the same section to the hills on the right bank of the Allier, near Issoire, the position of various other superficial deposits in which MM. Croizet, Bravard, Pomel and others have detected mammalian remains belonging each of them to very distinct assemblages of species, and which have doubtless originated at successive tertiary epochs. In the oldest freshwater tertiary beds, Nos. 2 and 3, the Palceoiherium, Anoplotherium, Anthracotherium, Didelphis, Crocodile, and other genera common to the Paris basin, have been found associated with species of Rhinoceros, Cervus, and some other genera, which, in Cuvier’s experience, had never been met with together in the same formation. Above these rests a sheet of basalt, No. 4, forming the north-west portion of the summit of Mont Perrier. In many places similar elevated basaltic platforms rest on gravel-beds, in which fossil mammalia have been detected. Next in age are the trachytic and pumiceous breccias and accompanying gravel-beds, 5, 5 a, 5 h, 5 c, which Were described by Sir R. Murchison and myself in a paper published in 1829 in the Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal for July. In the alluvial deposits 5 and 7, bones have been obtained belonging to the genera Mastodon (2 species), Rhinoceros, Tapir, Sus, Bos (2 species), Cervus (about 20 species), Antilope, Capra (2 species), Felis (7 species), Hyaena (2 species), Martes, Lutra, Cams, Ursus, Erinaceus, Marmot, Castor, Arvicola (2 species), and Lepus, all referable to extinct species. Next in age come two other alluvial deposits, Nos. 6 and 7, in which fossil mammalia of other species, according to M. Bravard, occur, the bones of Hippopotamus in particular having been met with in No. 6. Passing then to the south-east of Issoire, and crossing the Allier, we arrive at No. 8, the celebrated bone-bed of the Tour de Boulade, in which a great many other mammalia have been collected by the labours of MM. Bravard and Pomel; among others the Elephant, Rhinoceros (R.tichorhinus), Equus, Bos, Cer*;ws(including Reindeer), Antilope, Felis, and Canis. This assemblage differs considerably in its species from any other in the neighbourhood, and may be considered as more ancient in character than No. 9, alluded to in the beginning of this paper, or the bed which underlies the lava at Nechers. In regard to the Tour de Boulade bed, No. 8, its base is about sixty feet above the level of the Allier. It consists in great measure of angular pieces of freshwater limestone and basalt, which seem to have fallen from the steep slope of the hill above, or which at least are unrounded, and have not been brought from a distance. Some of the angular blocks are three feet in diameter. There is an intercalated sandy bed with bones such as may have been deposited in a river or sheet of water, into which these fragments of rock, detached by frost from the precipice, have rolled down. In this sandy stratum two marine shells have been found by MM. Bravard and Pomel, belonging decidedly to the genera Nalica and Pleurotoma. Although too imperfect to allow of the species being positively determined, they both approach closely to shells which I have from the faluns of Touraine. As no marine tertiary shells had been previously observed nearer to this part of Auvergne than the valley of the Loire, and as the deposit under consideration has a purely terrestrial or supra-marine aspect, I should not have given credit to this discovery if not attested by geologists, who are so cautious, and who were so alive to the novelty and importance of the phenomenon at the time when they found them, as were the naturalists above mentioned. They have been as much perplexed as I am to conceive how any current of water could have brought such shells from the north; and we can hardly suppose the Miocene sea to have ascended the valley of the Allier without leaving there some more decided monuments of its sojourn.
   There is only one other subject on which I shall offer a few observations. It has long been announced, that in the celebrated mountain of Gergovia M. Bouillet had found the Melania inquinata in some argillaceous marls in the north flank of the hill. I examined the spot with attention, and obtained by digging many specimens of the Melania in question, and of a Unio and Melanopsis which accompanied it in abundance. Some doubts had been raised by M. Bouillet whether the strata containing these shells belonged merely to a local deposit, or really formed an integral part of the great freshwater formation of Auvergne, of which the mass of the hill of Gergovia is composed. I consider the section however as perfectly clear, and the Melania and other fossils are evidently imbedded in a stratum, which crops out from beneath the capping of basalt which constitutes the flat summit of the mountain. It will be unnecessary to give a separate section, because the position of the beds is fully indicated by the point A, which I have placed in the upper freshwater strata below the basalt on the steep north-west slope of Mont Perrier. Many palaeontologists who had been inclined to regard the strata of the Limagne as considerably newer than the tertiary beds of any part of the Paris basin, had been surprised that a fossil eminently characteristic of the lower part of that basin, and found also under similar circumstances in the plastic clay of the London basin, should occur in the highest beds at, Ger- govia. I find however that all these Auvergne shells belong, if not to a distinct species, at least to a perfectly different variety from that found in the neighbourhood of Paris and London; and what renders the fact still more interesting, it is a variety which can hardly be distinguished from the recent Melania of the Philippine Islands, which M. Deshayes first identified with the Parisian fossil. Mr. G. B. Sowerby, in the Malacological Magazine, part 1, 1838, pointed out the differences existing between all the varieties of the Eocene Melania inquinata then known, and the varieties of the recent shell, which he proposed to name Melania Philippinarum; but he now admits that the most marked of these points of difference cannot be detected in the specimens I brought from Gergovia, which, although they may not be perfectly identical with any one variety of the living species, would yet be considered by most con- chologists as merely another variety of the same. The most obvious distinction between the ordinary Paris or London basin fossil, from the living Melania of the Philippines, consists in the absence in the former of those spiral ridges or raised strise which in the living shell intervene between the principal row of tubercles in each whorl and the suture. In all the fossil individuals from England and the Paris basin these are wanting, although I possess one specimen given me by M. Graves from the department of the Oise in which the strias are visible, though obsolete, a fact to which Prof. E. Forbes called my attention, and which may lead us to suspect that a series of intermediate gradations may one day be detected between the Parisian (Epernay), the Gergovian and the recent shell. In the meantime, however, we may regard the Auvergne and Philippine Island species, both in the form of the volutions, the prominent strias above mentioned and other characters, as belonging to one type, while the fossils of the Paris and London basins are referable to another. If all could be regarded as one species, its changes may be compared to those which the Cardium porulosum undergoes, as M. Deshayes has shown, as it appears successively in the sands of the Soissonois, in the calcaire grossier, and in the upper marine formation near Paris. No argument can therefore be founded in favour of the identity in age of the Parisian and Gergovian beds from the occurrence in both of this Melania, as the Auvergne variety is so distinct. This modification in form would be quite natural on the supposition that the freshwater beds of Auvergne were referable to the Miocene epoch. The Melanopsis associated with the Melania in the hill of Gergovia is more allied to the M. Dufourii than to M. buccinoides; the Unio seems peculiar at present to the locality. In regard to the age of the Auvergne beds generally, I have not yet seen sufficient reason, whether from the nature of the mammalian, reptilian, conchological or vegetable remains imbedded in them, to abandon the idea of their being Eocene, although it is true that they exhibit some characters in common with the Miocene period.
   
