THE observations which were made on the structure of this valley in 1814, appeared in the third volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society. Since that period, I have had (in 1817) an opportunity of traversing the same ground, and in somewhat greater detail. In so doing I have found no occasion to change the opinions then formed respecting its structure. On the contrary, a greater intimacy with its parts and with their disposition, and an increased practice in observation, have tended to confirm the remarks originally made. A slight correction only is required, resulting from a much wider investigation than the former; it respects gneiss, and will be introduced in its proper place.
Several additional circumstances have however occurred, which are not only interesting in themselves, but will probably be acceptable to the Society, as tending to render the account of this spot more complete. I need make no apology for the detached form in which they are recorded, as they do not admit of any useful arrangement.
GRANITE VEINS.—Since these veins have here been traced to the great mass of granite, it would be interesting to know how far they extend from it, as there are so few opportunities of pursuing the courses of granite veins to a central mass. Those formerly described are immediately lost in the hills that form the south-eastern boundary of the valley; although it is not possible to discover whether they actually terminate near the junction, or are prolonged far into the superincumbent strata. About a mile, however, from Blair, on the northern bank of the Tilt, 1 have since observed one which is about three miles distant from the nearest visible granite: it is but a few feet wide, and presents no peculiarity of structure. It is evident, however, that its apparent distance from the granite is no test of its real one; as the mass of granite may here be subjacent to the schistose rocks at no great distance, although no where coming to the surface. I may add also, that minute ramifications of granite are found traversing the schistose rocks, even in the bed of the Banavie, within the grounds of Athol House.
TRAP VEINS.—One of these was noticed in the original communication, already referred to, and I have since observed another at Gow's Bridge, during a low state of the waters of the river, which was not visible on former occasions. Its course is nearly conformable to the direction of the strata, which however it also intersects; and it presents no peculiarities either in its structure or its junctions. In many parts of Scotland such veins would be unworthy of notice; but they are deserving of record in a place where they are of very rare occurrence; which is the case wherever we recede far from the great overlying masses which abound in the middle, and on the western shores of this country.
LIMESTONE.—Among the micaceous schist and gneiss which form the northern boundary of the Tilt, and not far from its junction with the Garry, there occurs a remarkable variety of primary limestone. It is of a laminated structure, each lamina of calcareous matter being separated from the next by one of mica. The calcareous laminae rarely exceed the twentieth of an inch in thickness, and are often much less. The stone is readily fissile in the direction of the micaceous lamina; and as the calcareous one is only visible on the edge of the fractured specimen, on account of the continuity of the micaceous surface, it is easily mistaken for micaceous schist. The calcareous part of the stone is of a pale blueish-gray, the micaceous of a pale brown; and, as the lamina are perfectly flat and parallel, a section at right angles to them presents an appearance as regular as a succession of ruled lines.
The yellow marble, described at page 295 of the Memoir above mentioned, is of an uniform ochre colour only in one point. A more complete examination of the beds has shown that the predominant mass is of a white colour, intersected by numerous reticulating veins of pale ochry yellow. At the edges of the bed, where it comes into contact with the schistose rock, it assumes a grayish colour and loses its beauty; while it acquires great hardness and an argillaceous aspect. Marbles of this colour are much esteemed by architects on account of the warmth of their tints and the tranquillity of their effect in interior decoration.
The pink marble mentioned at page 306 has since been found in its natural place, between Fealair and the head of Glen Fernat. It is part of a bed which, like many of those before described, alternates both with micaceous schist and quartz rock; the beds every where changing their characters, both in their alternations and in their lateral progress. In some places it is of a continuous and considerable thickness; while in others the laminae do not exceed an inch or two, and alternate with blueish-gray earthy limestone and with micaceous schist. The texture is large-grained, and the fracture glistening; and its colour is a fine full-toned pink, wherever it does not pass into the gray just described. If a correct taste had not long since condemned the attempt to imitate colour as well as form in statuary, the tint of this marble would have rendered it an admirable substance for the representation of the naked figure. Nor does it appear applicable to mere architectural decoration; being of too insipid a character to stand alone, and ill adapted to harmonize with the colours prevalent in this class of ornament.
  As this colour is of rare occurrence in limestones, I may point out another bed of the same nature, which is found in the hills that bound the Tilt to the southward. Like the other limestones already described, it alternates with the quartz rock and other associated substances, reaching from the Fender towards the house of Lude. It is of an extremely fine texture, minutely granular, yet highly crystalline, like the finest arenaceous specimens from Carrava, and is so hard that an ordinary knife scratches it with difficulty. Its colour is neither so strong nor so continuous as that of the preceding, and indeed often vanishes altogether; but, wherever it exists, it borders more on the dilute crimson than the former. It is exceedingly translucent on the edges, and transmits a redder light than it reflects.
Besides the white marble already described as occurring at Gow's Bridge, another large bed exists in the hills that form the south-eastern boundary of the valley. In geological position it lies at a great distance from the former, an immense series of beds of quartz rock being interposed. It is found at the foot of Cairn Lia, not far from the Queen's mad, and in the lands of Lude. It is of a large-grained texture, and, where it is purely white, cannot be distinguished from the Parian. As far however as it is hitherto accessible, there is not much to be seen of so pure a quality; the predominant portion being tinged with a slight gray hue, such as would be produced by wetting a white substance capable of absorbing water. Hence also it displays a sort of transparent surface, which destroys its value in an ceconomical view. This gray colour seems indeed in a good measure to depend on the presence of water in the stone, as it is removed from many of the specimens by drying, when they assume a tolerably pure white aspect with a considerable lustre. It is not contaminated with mica, like the beds formerly described by the river side, and might probably, if fully opened, prove valuable, as it exists in considerable quantity, and in an apparently undisturbed state, the granite being far distant.
  In a former paper, published in the second volume of the Geological Transactions, I have described a bed of limestone containing hornblende, which occurs at Loch Laggan. As this circumstance is not common, I may point out another example of it, to be observed within the tract at present under consideration: it is in one of the beds which cross from the Tilt through the grounds of Lude. The rock is of a pale dove colour, and of a large grain; and is intermixed throughout with very minute particles of black hornblende, not exceeding in size a pin's point.
QUARTZ ROCK.—I have on different occasions shown that quartz rock often contains associated beds of breccia, in which respect it possesses an analogy to the secondary sandstones. In these cases the breccia consists of fragments of the same original rocks, which, in a more comminuted state, form the finer parts of the deposit, and is evidently of the same period of formation. I had at that time found no breccia connected with quartz rock itself, and composed of fragments of that rock reunited; but such a one occurs near the Fender, in the hilly ground south of the Tilt. Such local breccias are not uncommon among the secondary rocks, and they are particularly well known among the calcareous strata, where they form a considerable class of ornamental marbles.
  In the case of quartz rock, as well as in those now mentioned, the breccias must be supposed to have originated in some violent motion or fracture of the beds, without any material change of place; the parts being subsequently reunited by siliceous infiltrations, in a manner already pointed out in an article on quartz rock published in the fourth volume of the Geological Transactions.
GNEISS.—In my first communication on Glen Tilt I questioned the occurrence of this rock as an extensive member of the strata which lie on the granite. There appears no reason to change this statement, as far as relates to the hills which bound the southern side of the valley, and which alone were described in the paper. But the case is otherwise with respect to the hills on the northern side, which I had not then examined; since gneiss occurs there in considerable abundance, together with quartz rock, micaceous schist, and different varieties of hornblende schist. It is probable therefore that the observations of Professor Playfair and Lord Webb Seymour have differed from mine, solely from the circumstance of our having examined different points on the same ground.
MARL.—I find, on examining the Perthshire agricultural report, that the marl described in my original memoir (page 316 &c.) has been observed in other situations. It has merely however been looked on with the eye of an agriculturist, and apparently confounded with those marl beds found on flat ground under peat, which are the produce of subaquatic shell-fish, and indicate the places where small lakes have formerly existed.
QUARTZ.—Besides the varieties formerly described, I have found hyaline quartz in veins, in the micaceous schist of Glen Tilt: a circumstance by no means common, as the quartz of veins is almost always opaque. The specimens in question are sometimes colourless, at others of a pale smoky brown, resembling the specimens that accompany the titanite in the chlorite schists of Killin. I may also add, that groups of crystals of opake quartz, of a very large size, occur among the granite of the surrounding mountains; a circumstance deserving of notice, only because of its rarity throughout Scotland; where, unlike to Cornwall, the quartz is rarely found in a crystallized state.
PINITE.—Besides the brown porphyry in which this mineral is found, it occurs in two other varieties, the one of a pale brownish pink colour, the other of a pale gray. In both these rocks it is more abundant than in the one formerly described; while, from the contrast of colour, it is at the same time more conspicuous. I may add that the porphyries of these hills are often of a very compound structure, containing, besides their characteristic ingredient, crystals of quartz, mica, and hornblende.
PYRITES.—Occasionally small irregular nodules of copper pyrites are found in the quartz veins that traverse the schistose rocks. Iron pyrites is also found crystallized in cubes which are sometimes an inch in size. It seems to occur indiscriminately in all the rocks; in the granite, the schists, and the limestone; but it is most frequent in the micaceous and hornblende schists.
SPHENE.—Although this mineral is of most frequent occurrence among the granites that contain hornblende, it is not limited to those varieties. I may also remark that the magnitude of its crystals, in the specimens in which it occurs, bears a proportion to the magnitude of the particles of the rock; being minute in those of a small grain, and large in those of a coarser texture.
TITANITE.—I have mentioned this substance as occurring in Scarsough and in Ben Gloe. In both instances it is but in small quantity; but I have since found it in considerably greater abundance in the hills that bound the southern side of Glen Tilt. It is there crystallized in prismatic forms, and imbedded in nodules of chlorite, which are associated with quartz veins, traversing micaceous schist; a situation exactly resembling that in which it is found at Kill in. In many cases the crystals are fractured, or else geniculated; for it is often by no means clear to which of the two causes the deviation in their rectilinear directions is to be attributed. In one instance a specimen occurred in which a crowd of capillary crystals, as fine as the finest hair, traversed a vacant cavity in the quartz; and it is not unusual for the larger prisms to shoot through vacant spaces in the vein. I may add here, that I procured at Killin one specimen of a hollow crystal of this substance, the prism of more than an inch in length, having a perforation in the direction of its axis. This is a circumstance of no very common occurrence in crystallization; and I may, for that reason, remark that I have also met with it in the tourmalin: the specimen in question being a mere tube, very thin, and with a large vacancy.
TREMOLITE.—Besides the varieties formerly enumerated, I have since observed the following; which it will not be useless to mention, on account of the diversity of aspect presented by this mineral, and the obscurity which attends some of the more uncommon modifications.
  1. Compact and granular; or at least so little marked by prismatic forms that they cannot be distinguished except in certain favourable fractures. It differs from the granular variety formerly described, in being of a much coarser texture, and of an obscure purplish gray colour.
  2. White and granular, with a schistose fracture. I formerly described this variety, as far as its texture is concerned; but the stratum I had then observed was of a massive structure: in the present instance the mineral occurs in the same situation, but is readily divisible into thin laminae.
  3. The third variety worthy of notice is a compact aggregate of minute spherules, not exceeding the tenth of an inch in diameter. It is of a watery gray colour, and each spherule is found, on fracture, to consist of capillary crystals radiating; from a centre: it presents a singular as well as beautiful specimen for collectors.
  4. Transparency, at least to a certain degree, has I believe been considered a characteristic of trcmolite. A variety is however found in this place of a whitish green colour, and perfectly opaque. As is usual among the more common kinds, it is radiated; the radii being about an inch in length. The form of the crystals is however imperfect; and their disposition more confused than in the ordinary kinds.
  5. Tremolite is found also among the limestone of this district, in other situations besides Gow's bridge, where 1 originally discovered it. The most remarkable variety which occurred consists of broad lamina-, radiating from a common centre, and of course presenting greater dimensions at the circumference than the centre. The length of the radii extends to four or five inches, and their breadth from an eighth to a sixth, or even to a quarter of an inch.
  6. The next variety which appears to merit notice consists of spheres, from half an inch to an inch in diameter, imbedded in the limestone. They are generally placed at a small distance from each other, and, as they are much harder than the including rock, arc readily discovered in water-worn fragments; often projecting a semidiameter beyond the worn surface. Occasionally they present a fibrous and radiated structure; but they are often extremely compact, and the structure consequently very obscure. They are of a sea-green or pale beryl colour.
  7. The very fine fibrous variety occurs also here of a pale green colour, and in considerable quantity. The fibres are fasciculated and parallel, often exceeding six inches in length, and either straight or curved; and the lustre resembles that of silk.
  8. Lastly, this mineral is found of a similar green colour, but in the form of crystals, from an eighth to the fifth of an inch in diameter, entangled together so as to constitute a solid mass of considerable hardness when dry; but, like all these substances, extremely tender when first taken from the quarry.
  I formerly mentioned that tremolite and sahlite were found in the same place, and in contact; but was not then quite aware of the intimacy of their connexion. They are occasionally so intermixed together, that it is not easy to be certain that the one mineral does not graduate into the other: and it is not impossible that such a transition does actually take place. It is also a remarkable fact, that wherever I have observed sahlite in Scotland, there tremolite is likewise found, and always in the same intimate union.
FELSPAR.—Crystallized felspar is sufficiently rare in Scotland to render any notice of its localities desirable. It occurs in veins in micaceous schist on the hills that form the southern boundary of Glen Tilt. The substances associated with it in the same vein, are quartz and crystallized mica; the whole forming a sort of granite vein, all the ingredients of which are independently crystallized. It is commonly white, occasionally with a very pale tint of fleshcolour. Although the specimens are of considerable size and the crystals numerous, they are not so well defined as to permit their forms to be easily described. Among them I observed flat rhombs and prisms of various complicated figures, rendered more so by numerous irregular truncations of their summits, but very obscure, either from the manner of their adhesion, or from their coalescence with others. Whatever interest the almost endless modifications of crystals may possess, I know not that there is any thing in this case, more than in many others, deserving of minute details; the more so that, without figures, the descriptions of complicated geometric forms are scarcely to be rendered intelligible. One of the specimens which I procured in this place, exhibited a rare, perhaps a singular, appearance. The interior of the crystals was of the usual white colour, but the surface to the depth of a line or more was of a clear dark brown, graduating into the white, but not from the effect of decomposition. As the collection of crystals consisted only of the variously facetted summits of prisms, in which trapezoidal and rhomboidal figures prevailed, the specimen bore a strong resemblance to a mass of crystallized garnet.
ADULARIA.—This mineral is of still more rare occurrence in Scotland than the preceding. The very small specimens which I procured, were found in the same cavities with the felspar, and consisted of quadrangular prisms with terminations variously and irregularly facetted.
GARNET.—This mineral is so common in the schistose rocks of Scotland, that it is almost unnecessary to mention it as found at this particular place. It occurs both in the micaceous schist and in the hornblende schist; in which latter it is here very common, although by no means of very frequent occurrence in this rock in other situations. It is more worthy of remark, that it is often of a very pale reddish-white colour and granular fracture, much resembling certain varieties of granular quartz; and that, in some cases, it is so like, both in colour and texture, to the very compound schists in which it is imbedded, that it would not be suspected to exist if it was not detected by the wratheringof the rock, which leaves it projecting on the surface where it is scarcely discoverable in the fresh fracture. There are few minerals which, with a steady geometric form, present so wide a range of aspect and composition.
MICA.—Independently of the common scaly form under which this substance occurs, in mixture with the ordinary rocks, I have found it, in the hills so often mentioned, under three distinct forms of crystallization, all of them more or less interesting, particularly as it is not often met with in this country in a detached and crystallized state.
  It occurs imbedded in porphyry in the form of regular hexagonal prisms, about the tenth of an inch both in diameter and length: in all the specimens which I observed it is of a black colour. It is not very unusual to meet with it in porphyries, but it is rarely seen of so regular and perfect a form. Perhaps the most interesting circumstance attendant on this mica is the uniform direction of the crystals, the flat surfaces of the prisms all lying in parallel planes :—an occurrence which I have on other occasions noticed, both in ordinary porphyry veins and in veins of trap belonging to the most recent formations of that substance. A very important geological inference may be drawn from it respecting the disposition of the mica in those rocks which are supposed to owe their laminar structure to stratification. It is evident that this parallel disposition in gneiss and in micaceous schist, is not sufficient to prove that the mica has been mechanically deposited from a state of suspension; since, in rocks which from their venous form have unquestionably not been deposited in this manner, it equally holds a parallel arrangement. I may add that the parallelism of the mica in the porphyry veins, is conformable to the fissile tendency of the including rock, which, in all the cases that I have yet observed, is also parallel to the sides of the vein, even where that is at right angles with the surrounding strata, so as to leave no uncertainty respecting its truly venous character. There is no doubt that this universal parallelism, in crystals so numerous and so widely separated from each other, must depend on some common crystalline polarity; although we may be unable to explain this property, which is, however, no more obscure than every other phenomenon connected with crystallization. I have formerly pointed out analogous examples; and they are of frequent occurrence in cases where the phenomenon appears to have escaped notice, of which one of the most remarkable is that of graphic granite. In this it often happens that the same face of all the interrupted crystals of felspar through an extensive vein, is placed in the same direction: a fact easily examined in sunshine by taking reflections on various fractured points of the whole. I shall not here pursue this subject further; but may remark that the same circumstance of uniformity in direction attends on the pinite formerly described.
Mica occurs also in the cavities of micaceous schist, crystallized at liberty. It forms extensive groups in these; being sometimes accompanied by a brown ochraceous powder, resulting, probably, from the decomposition of some mineral which cannot now be ascertained. The crystals are of an hexagonal form, and the prisms so short as to be mere scales. They vary from a quarter to one-sixth of an inch in diameter, and adhere to the stone, by their edges, so slightly, that they fall off in abundance in consequence of the jarring of the hammer. Their colour is silvery-white.
CHLORITE.—This mineral occurs here in two modes.
  It is found together with titanite, as already mentioned, in cavities in micaceous schist, forming irregular nodules; and also occupies similar situations in a blue schistose limestone, when it is generally accompanied by crystallized carbonate of lime. In one place it was found of a bright golden-yellow colour, with a perfectly metallic lustre; this effect appearing to arise from an incipient decomposition, although the specimen had lost nothing of its original firmness.
The next variety of this mineral is more remarkable, and, like the mica above mentioned, it is found in cavities in micaceous schist, sometimes accompanied by crystallized felspar. The crystals are crowded together, so as to confuse each other's forms in some cases; in others they are so independent as to be easily examined. When most perfect, the form is a very short hexagonal prism, terminated in each end by an obtuse hexagonal pyramid, of which the apex is truncated: the surfaces are almost always striated by fine lines indicating the direction of the scales into which the crystal is separable. Occasionally the prism is followed by a succession of two or more pyramidal frusta, each in order more obtuse than the preceding. In other instances the sides of the prism and of the corresponding pyramids become curved; and thus the crystals assume a spheroidal shape. When broken, in these cases, they are often found to consist of triangular laminae radiating from a centre; so that the external figure is not formed, as would at first be supposed, by a succession of plates varying in size and parallel to the original prism. The colour of this variety is a dark green, and the ordinary dimension of the crystals is half an inch.
  I must here add, that in the porphyry veins, which contain both pinite and mica, there is sometimes found a mineral which I am at a loss to name; since it cannot be referred to any of the known varieties of either substance. It is crystallized, like these, in hexagonal scales, which also maintain a general parallelism, and are about the tenth of an inch in diameter; but is distinguished from mica by its softness and want of elasticity, and from pinite, by its lustre, which is perfectly metallic. As mineralogists have recently found reason to suspect that the term mica comprises some varieties or species essentially distinct in some important points, it is not improbable that this also may be a distinct substance requiring an appropriate name.
CALCEDONY.—Although this mineral is of common occurrence, I have never hitherto observed it in the rock in which it is here found; namely, in micaceous schist. It does not occupy a vein, but occurs in slender rifts in the stone; covering the surface with flattish botryoidal protuberances.
ACTINOLITE.—This is found in many of the rocks about Glen Tilt in considerable abundance. It is not uncommon in the gneiss, in which it generally forms a lamina more or less continuous; thus usurping the place of hornblende. The crystals, in this case, are of considerable dimensions. It occurs also in veins of pink carbonate of lime which traverse gneiss in the Banavie, and not far from the termination of the valley. Here it is fibrous, commonly radiated from various centres, and of a light-green colour; forming an ornamental contrast with the red hue of the substance in which it is imbedded. Lastly, it enters, in minute crystals, into the composition of a stratum of granular limestone of the same colour; producing also a very ornamental variety of marble, but which is in too small quantity to be applicable to any useful purposes.
CALCAREOUS SPAR.—TO the instances of the occurrence of this substance formerly mentioned, I may add the following:
Veins and nodules of a bright ochre-yellow and crystallized carbonate of lime, occur occasionally among the blue limestone; the concretions being of large size and of a large platy fracture. Being sometimes irregularly intermixed with the blue basis, and with veins of white carbonate, they are often capable of being cut and polished into very ornamental marbles. They are not, however, sufficiently abundant to possess any value in an oeconomical view.
  In some of the schistose beds there occur small strata of white and yellow granular carbonate, the grains of which equal the size of the seeds of a pomegranate; and as they impress each other in a similar manner, this comparison conveys the best idea that can be given of them.
  Perfectly formed crystals of calcareous spar are rare in this place; but I have recently observed the two varieties known by the name of the dog-tooth and the nail-head, together with the primitive rhomb.
DISTHENE.—This is the last of the substances which I have discovered in Glen Tilt since my original paper was drawn up, and with it I shall close these miscellaneous remarks. It occurs in a vein of quartz traversing micaceous schist, in two different places. In one, it is of its most ordinary blue colour; in the other, of a pearl gray. It is imbedded in the quartz; but one end of the prism is invariably fixed in the schist in which the vein is contained. Otherwise, it presents no peculiarity requiring a detailed notice.

