HAVING on two former occasions continued the imperfect history of Quartz Hock, originally given in the second volume of the Society's Transactions, as fresh materials occurred, no apology is required for this additional notice, the result of some investigations made during the present summer (1817). It is not necessary to enter into further details respecting its geographical extent in Scotland, although large additions might be made to the tracts which were described as composed of it; the principal objects of the former communications having been already attained in the proofs adduced of its importance as a member of the primary stratified rocks. The present remarks relate solely to the geological relations of quartz rock; and their object is to confirm and extend some circumstances respecting those which, although formerly mentioned, were either too limited to be quite satisfactory, or were attended with some degree of obscurity.
The relations of quartz rock to micaceous schist, to argillaceous schist, and to graywacke, have been fully described in the former papers. At the same time it has been observed, that it graduated on some occasions into gneiss, and also alternated with certain varieties of that rock, as well as with the micaceous schist which accompanied it. But as the gneiss in these cases was of an indeterminate, and, perhaps, of a disputable character, while it seemed rather a modification or a subordinate member of the micaceous schist, than an extensive and independent mass, it still remained a doubt whether quartz rock did actually alternate with gneiss in an unquestionable manner, and on' a scale corresponding to its alternation with micaceous schist. That doubt has now been removed by a further examination of the west coast of Sutherland, where it abounds; as I formerly mentioned in the original communication on this subject.
The character of the gneiss is here as decided as its extent is unquestionable; since it forms a very large portion of the country, and presents all its varieties from the granitic to the schistose. And although its structure is such that it cannot always be satisfactorily distinguished from micaceous schist, yet these cases bear no proportion to those in which its character is strongly marked; while, over a large space, it presents that approximation to the granitic disposition which characterizes the gneiss of the Western Isles. It is also distinguished by the presence of granite veins, and by the occasional occurrence of very extensive masses of granite.
This great mass of gneiss is succeeded in some places by the tract of quartz rock formerly mentioned, and alternates with it in others. Thus the latter rock is found under a great variety of position; sometimes in a detached state, occupying the summits of those mountains of which the chief mass consists of gneiss; at others, covering considerable tracts of country, and forming the lowest as well as the highest land. Examples of the former will be found in Ben Stack and in the northernmost Ben More; while the great tract from Ben More Assynt to Canasp and Cuniach, presents an instance of the latter disposition. But this change is not always effected without an alternation of the two; not merely that slight alternation of a few beds which so often occurs at the point of contact between approximate rocks, but one that involves masses of almost mountainous bulk.
  It is necessary to remark, that the leading direction of the beds of gneiss, as well as of the rocks which accompany it in this tract, is north-easterly; that direction, however, from the usual inconstancy and undulation of the beds, being seldom determinable within four or five points of the compass; since it is subject to vary twenty degrees or more from this average bearing. The dip is still more various, but may be generally comprised between the angles of ten and thirty degrees. In both the places which I shall point out as presenting the alternation in question, the direction appears to be E.N.E. and the dip about fifteen degrees.
One instance of alternation is seen at the north side of Glen Dhu, and near its upper extremity. The bed of quartz rock appears to be about one hundred feet thick, and reposes on that gneiss which extends to the western sea. It presents its broken face to the southward, and is easily examined. It consists of very even and parallel strata, of an extremely compact variety, subject to crack in numerous directions from the injuries of the weather, and then crumbling so as to form a slope extending from the foot of the precipitous face to the shore of the Loch. Its predominant colours are white, yellowish, and gray; but many of the beds are of a pink, others of a brown purple hue; while some present the colour and, except in their superior compactness, the aspect of red sandstone. A few are mottled with red and white, in spots, stripes, or irregular stains, such as are well known to occur in many varieties of the lowest red sandstone. This is in fact an instance of the association of quartz with the primary sandstone described as occurring in Sky.
This mass is followed by a similar gneiss to that which lies below it, and which not only forms the principal part of Ken More, but extends in succession to the head of Loch Shin, and so on, to a distance which I need not here specify. This is the most conspicuous and satisfactory alternation found in these hills, but not the only one; since, in crossing the ridge to Loch More, the quartz rock is again found on one of the inferior summits. There are no obvious means, however, of determining whether this mass also alternates with the gneiss; nor did it appear of such moment as to call for a laborious search, as the fact is sufficiently proved by the appearance of the beds on the shores of Loch Dim.
Similar arrangements are seen on the south side of that inlet of the sea which flows through the Cylescuagh, into Glendhu and Glencoul, and which is without a name.
  It is unnecessary to dwell more particularly on these; since the alternation of the gneiss is established in a similar manner, by the positions of both rocks, and by the conformity of their dips; while the mineral characters of the quartz rodv are the same as those of the beds already described. The object of this paper not being of a geographical nature, I shall not at present trace the quartz rock further; since better opportunities of entering fully into this branch of the subject will hereafter occur.
  It would have been desirable, in the particular instance first described in this paper, to have traced the actual contact of the gneiss and quartz rock where the alternation is most demonstrable: but, unfortunately, as is too often the case, the nature of the ground does not admit of it. Those parts of the hills where the rocks are bare, and where these contacts should be seen, are precipitous and inaccessible; while the flatter, are, from their more gentle declivity, covered with an impenetrable mass of rubbish. In every respect indeed the country is of the most difficult access. But the contact in question and the nature of the transition, though they cannot be seen here, are to be found in many other situations where the two rocks exist together. They can thus be traced in Ben Ay, in Ben Klibrigg, and in other parts of Sutherland. In these cases there appears a gradual transition for some space between the two; the gneiss first putting on the aspect of micaceous schist, which then passes into a micaceous and highly schistose quartz rock, and ultimately into pure quartz rock, of various degrees of compactness and induration.
  On a former occasion I pointed out an alternation which quartz rock forms in the Isle of Sky with the red sandstone. That observation is no longer solitary; since the west coast of Sutherland also produces many instances of the same nature, besides that at Glendhu just mentioned. As the description of the conglomerate and sandstone of that district is not my object in the present communication, it is sufficient to say that they resemble the corresponding rocks of Sky, above referred to, in every respect; presenting the same varieties in colour, composition, and induration. The alternation of this sandstone, under its several modifications, with the quartz rock, is visible in many places; and when the large-grained conglomerates form the alternating bed, the appearance is not a little unexpected.
These alternations occur in two ways, both in single beds and in mountain masses; in the former case differing from the example described in Sky, where no interchange of beds on a small scale was observed. The beds in question, like those above enumerated, have a north-easterly course, with a southern dip, frequently at angles not exceeding 10°. Among the places where these alternations are visible the most accessible are Cuniach and Ben Stack. To examine the former mountain, if the object is to trace the alternations on the great scale, a considerable tract must be compared; but in various parts of the outskirts of the mountain the minor alternations are accessible with little labour. Ben Stack presents these latter only.—It is unnecessary to enter into more details of localities, as many of them cannot be particularly described, for want of marks; and the geologist who is inclined to undergo the toil of traversing this trackless and abandoned region, will not regret the additional labour of investigating more minutely the only objects which it presents to reward him for the sacrifice.
FURTHER REMARKS ON QUARTZ ROCK. 
1818—1819. 
The object of these concluding remarks is to supply that which was wanting in the former supplements, and to complete, as far as the history of quartz rock is known to myself, the materials from which a general account of its characters and geological connexions may he deduced.
  In a very extensive review of the north-western coast of Scotland and among the rest of that tract described in the preceding paper, the observations which it contains have been both confirmed and multiplied;—quartz rock having been found to extend over considerable spaces in Ross-shire in places which I had not visited in the summer of 1817. In these it occurs in alternation with gneiss, as well as with that red sandstone, which, from its situation both in Sky and on the main land, I have thought fit to rank among the primary rocks. In these cases there is sometimes an obvious gradation between tl»e latter and the quartz rock; but in many places the distinction between the two is strongly marked. In the predominant examples, however, it appears to alternate with gneiss, and often in beds, or in a series of repeated beds of equal dimensions; and this distinction between the two rocks is here also marked almost invariably with great precision.
The entrance of the eastern side of Loch Eribol consists entirely of quartz rock; and it is here very remarkable for the magnitude, number, and variety of the caves which it contains, and for the singular and picturesque forms of various kinds into which it is broken.
Here, as at Macarthurs Head, in Isla, the quartz contains pyrites in considerable quantity; and the effect produced by the decomposition of this latter substance, is such as to be very deceptive; the exterior surface of the cliffs of quartz rock being frequently stained of a reddish brown hue, so as no longer to resemble that substance, so generally conspicuous by its whiteness; but very exactly imitating the colour of granite. The deception is often rendered perfect by the forms of the rock, and can only be detected by manual examination: and it will be useful to have pointed out this circumstance; since, either from confidence in the supposed facility of determining the character of rocks at a distance, or from the impossibility of obtaining a near access, geologists of confined experience may easily be led by it into erroneous conclusions.
  In Loch Eribol the quartz rock also presents examples of considerable curvatures, which, in general, is a very rare occurrence; as, in most cases, where sudden flexures or contortions occur in the micaceous and argillaceous schists by which it is accompanied, it is itself fractured and not bent. Near the Whiten head, in this inlet, a remarkable example of this limited curvature may be seen; the exterior parts having fallen away so as to leave a large portion exposed in the form of a semicylindrical body.
In a former paper it was remarked, that a considerable tract in Mar TOL. TI. , consisted of quartz rock; but I was not then aware of the exact mode in which it occurred with respect to the other rocks with which it is there associated. This whole district presents a perpetual alternation, both in the great and small scale, of gneiss and micaceous schist, but principally of the former substance, with the rock in question. And here, not only the alternation between the gneiss and quartz rock is so frequent, but the apparent transition between the two is so perfect, that it is quite impossible, without minute examination of the fractured rock, to determine which is present; the external aspect and general characters of both being precisely the same. Partly from this frequency of alternation, and partly from the impossibility of determining the nature of the rocks without such minute investigation as is impracticable, it is not possible, in a map, to express the nature of the rocky strata, except in a general manner.
The association of gneiss with quartz rock is less common in the northern parts of Aberdeenshire; but where the latter substance occurs there, in the vicinity of granite, it is attended by appearances of an interesting nature, more particularly as respects the history of that compound. Ben-na-chie, among other places, presents a very remarkable and accessible example of the changes of character which the quartz rock thus exhibits in contact with the granite. The regularity of the stratification is disturbed, and in many places the strata are also fractured and displaced. Where the fractures are considerable, the parts are sometimes reunited by minuter fragments and by crystalline quartz; and in many places these fragments are so numerous, that the whole mass forms a breccia or an angular local conglomerate of a peculiar character. In other cases cavities remain in the intervals; and their surfaces are then generally covered with minute drusy crystallizations of quartz.
Many of these beds, also, lose the character of quartz, and put on the aspect of chert, sometimes gray, and at others of a reddish, or red-brown colour. Others, of a more argillaceous character, resemble jasper, and are indeed in many places not to be distinguished from the most siliceous varieties of that mineral; nor is it uncommon to find an intimate mixture of quartz, chert, and jasper in the same bed, sometimes disposed in an irregularly laminar manner, at others intermixed in great confusion.
  If we recollect the variable composition of quartz rock where it occurs at a distance from granite, it is not difficult to account for the peculiarities of character in the instance under review. They are in all respects analogous to those which take place in different rocky strata, not only where they approximate to granite, but where they are in contact with masses or veins of the trap rocks. The production of chert and jasper is easily accounted for, by supposing the original quartz rock to have contained felspar in different proportions; and the peroxidation of the iron, equally accounts for the red colour of the altered rocks. The fracture and displacement arc in all respects analogous to those which occur among strata in the vicinity of trap; and the whole presents an additional mass of evidence respecting the analogous powers of trap and granite in altering the characters and conditions of the strata with which they interfere. If the action of heat be admitted in the one case, it is not easy to see how it is to be refused in the other, when the effects in both so exactly correspond.
The last association of quartz rock which has been discovered by the investigations of 1819, is of a more intricate nature; and with a sketch of that I shall finally terminate these supplements. The Transactions of the Geological Society having formed the repository of these progressive remarks on a rock before obscure, it is unnecessary to apologize for the wish to place the whole in the same work; although a full view of this part of the subject is given in the author's account of the Western Islands of Scotland.
The peculiar series here to be described consists of a repeated alternation of this rock with micaceous schist, chlorite schist, and hornblende schist; the two latter presenting many remarkable varieties of composition and texture. This series extends over a considerable tract of country, in very regular stratification.
The beds of these different rocks rarely exceed a very few yards, and are often but a few inches in thickness. In general the quartz rock forms a bed of the largest of these dimensions, and is accompanied by a small one of micaceous schist. The other substances follow in an order more or less regular; and thus the series is repeated, with various inclinations, for a space of not less than twenty miles across the whole. The linear direction is remarkably exact, and the beds exhibit no marks of disturbance.
  In these beds few examples occur, as far as I examined it, of that variety of quartz rock which contains felspar; and those which are found differ much in aspect from what occurs in association with gneiss, in which that mineral forms so conspicuous an ingredient. The predominant beds are simple, compact, granular or splintery, but occasionally also micaceous.
  In concluding this final supplement it will be useful to enumerate the leading varieties of quartz rock, as far as respects its mineral characters; but the fuller details of these must unavoidably be reserved for a more appropriate place.
  

