IN the following paper, I am to describe shortly a point of coast, which Professor JAMESON, in his examination of East Lothian, had not an opportunity of visiting. It is called Ravensheugh, situated about six miles N. W. of Dunbar, and is part of the pleasure-ground belonging to the estate of Tyningham, on the north side of what are called Tyningham Sands. A small wooden summer-house is erected on the highest point of the rock, which commands a singular and extensive view of the surrounding ocean, and neighbouring country:
   The approach to Ravensheugh, on the land- side, is gradual and insensible in its rise ; but towards the sea, there is formed a precipice or precipitous front, which may be from forty to fifty feet high. This projects into the shore in, the shape of an obtuse angle, pointing nearly N. E.; and immediately behind the most prominent part of the rock, there is a considerable rent or chasm, lying in a direction W. of N., which, at full tide, when the sea is agitated, has a striking resemblance to the Bullers of Buchan, by the rushing and foam and noise of the water. On the south side of the point, there is another opening into the shore, which might suggest the idea, that the headland, or point itself, had been detached by violence from the body of the rock. I am satisfied, however, that these rents have been occasioned merely by the action of the water, on a part of the rock, where perhaps a slight subsidence had taken place, before it was entirely consolidated.
   Ravensheugh is a trap formation of the newer series, apparently overlying, but in reality subordinate to, and contained in the old red sandstone. Its constituent members, are, basalt with crystals of hornblende ; red and green trap-tuff, impregnated with lime ; beautiful clinkstone,; and clinkstone-porphyry, or porphyry-slate. This last occupies the upper part of the formation ; and from the regular structure of the stone splitting in uniform parallel lines, exhibits an appearance like basaltic columns lying horizontally. The layers of rock thus formed, are from a few inches to a foot and a half, or two feet thick, and, contrasted with the irregular rude shapes of the great masses in which they appear, have a singular and pleasing effect to the eye.
   The sandstone formation, on which the: trap rests, and which forms the level part of the shore uncovered by the sea at low water, contains varieties of the old red, of different shades, alternating with layers of brown and grey. Particular portions of it have the usual characters of quartzy sandstone y others are micaceous, and approach to what is called sandstone-slate. In this formation, we also find beds oi layers of clay- ironstone ; of slaty argillaceous marl y of coarse limestone, with clay-balls of a greenish colour ; and of claystone, inclining to calcareous marl, including nodules of light-yellow and green-coloured clay. Along the shore which was examined, and which extends fot a mile and a half, or two miles the dip and direction of these different beds or layers are sufficiently uniform, excepting at the immediate junction of the trap and sandstone rocks, which presents an appearance extremely curious, and well entitled to the particular attention of the geologist.
   Here the sandstone, deserting its usual dip and direction, seems to run beneath the basalt on every side, in the form of a vast cup or plate, filled with the solid mass of the trap, which rises upright from its edge. Consequently, the dip of the sandstone underneath the north side of the basaltic rock, is nearly the reverse of what it appears to be on the south side. The explanation of this curious and interesting appearance, is easy and natural, if we consider the trap of Ravensheugh as a rock subordinate to the sandstone, and : belonging to the same period of formation ; but the peculiarity which has been described, seems to be altogether irreconcilable with the principles of the igneous theory. To perceive this, let us attend a little to what is meant by cotemporaneous formation.
  It cannot be meant, that a whole mass of stratified or amorphous matter is instantaneously deposited ; this appears inconceivable. But there is no difficulty in supposing, that layers or substances on the great scale, are formed by continuous successive accretion of matter deposited from a solvent, as we see in the instances of crystallization or deposition, wffiich fall under our observation, either in nature, or in the laboratory of the chemist. Let us, therefore, now conceive, that, after the sandstone was deposited, but before its complete consolidation had taken place, a mass of trap followed next in the order of successive deposition, What would be the consequence ? Would not the superincumbent mass sink by its gravity to a certain depth among the softer strata underneath, presenting the very appearance observed at Ravensheugh,—more especially, if deposited, as it is there, unconform ably? Suppose a number of strata or layers of a tenacious paste, or any soft elastic substance, overlying each other, and a heavy body of smaller dimensions laid above them, it is evident, that the weight of the body would press it downwards, and form a hollow corresponding to its shape, in which the layers would be seen bent, and running beneath the body on every side, exactly as we find in the present instance.
  On the other hand, had this been a case of igneous bursting from below, all the phenomena must have been precisely the reverse of what they are. The strata, instead of sloping quietly beneath the mass, ought to have appeared as if forced up, with an inclination outwards from the projected rock, and with other symptoms of dislocation and ruin. But far otherwise, no marks of violence are to be observed. The out-goings of the subjacent rocks on every side, though worn down in very irregular shapes, preserve their usual line of direction without disturbance, to the very bottom of the basaltic mass; and it is even probable, that,at some period not very remote, they had embraced the trap-rock to a much higher level than at present; all which, strongly favours the idea of cotemporaneous formation, as here explained.
  About a mile N. W. of Ravensheugh, there is another elevated rock, consisting chiefly of clinkstone and basalt, with crystals of hornblende, where similar appearances in relation to the underlying sandstone are to be observed.


