IT is remarkable, that amongst the phenomena of the mineral kingdom, on which the two geological theories now in discussion, have been founded, there should be so many that do not admit of an unequivocal or exclusive application to either side of the question at issue. A great number of these appearances may be explained on the principles of both systems, so as to render it a matter of doubt with some enquirers, to which of them we ought to give the preference ; nor is there perhaps a single fact yet observed, which is acknowledged on all sides as possessing distinctly the character of what may be called an experimentum crucis, to decide the faith of mineralogists.

  Of the former description here alluded to, I have lately found a striking instance, in the Cartlane Craig, which is a vast chasm, in the sandstone formation, above Lanark, traditionally celebrated as one of the places where the heroic but unfortunate WALLACE concealed himself from the search of the English. It is evidently formed by the under side or projecting shoulder of a round backed mountain-mass, somehow detached from the body or upper part. The general line of this enormous and singular rent, which runs nearly in the direction of N. E. and S. W., is that of the segment of a circle, sweeping to a distance of at least three-fourths of a mile from the one extremity to the other. Its greatest depth can hardly be less than 400 feet; and its width above, at the highest point, probably ex ceeds 600 feet, although at the bottom, it is little more than the breadth of a small stream, called the Mouse, which finds its way, by this opening, into the Clyde. Towards the extremities, the height on both sides gradually declines, till the chasm entirely disappears, as may be easily conceived from the shape of the mass or projecting shoulder in which it occurs, and which approaches the figure of a spherical segment. From the upr per extremity to the lower, there is a considerable descent of level.

   The whole extent of the Cartlane Craig, along its edges and steep faces, particularly on the lower side, is richly fringed and beautifully clothed with plantations and brush-wood, so as to exhibit one of the finest and most romantic pieces of natural scenery, that can be imagined. In spite, however, of this Covering, and of the waste which must have gone far in the course of ages, to disfigure the face of the rock, and destroy the traces of its fracture, the more remarkable features of this extraordinary mineral appearance, are still discernible on the slightest inspection. It presents a succession of projecting and reentering angles, reaching from the top to the bottom of the solid front, which are most distinctly observed towards the centre or highest part: each projection on the one side having its correspondent recess on the other, and the opposite faces or edges of the disrupted strata shewing their original continuity.
   These circumstances, render it probable, that the chasm in question has owed its existence to the operation of some cause, not of a slow and silent kind, as the wearing of water, or the decomposition of the rock, but more sudden and violent in its action : and to explain it satisfactorily, I would now propose, as a geological problem, of no inconsiderable curiosity and interest.

   For this purpose, it must be further stated, as a part of the description of the Cartlane Craig, that near the middle of the great fissure, we find the channel of the stream crossed, by a mass of greenstone, or flcetz-trap rock, which traverses the strata in a direction almost perpendicular to the course of the hollow at that place. In the neighbourhood of the greenstone, smaller %veins or portions of the same substance may be traced running in a similar direction, and exhibiting at some places the characters of basalt. The immediate connection of these smaller branches or veins with the largest mass, is concealed by the soil and coppice-wood, and debris in the bed of the water ; but in the language of the Huttonian School, they would be described as shooting from it;
   Now, on the principles of the igneous theory, the presence of greenstone in the position which it occupies here, affords at once the solution required ; and the Cartlane Craig becomes an example, on a large scale, of disruption and dislocation produced by a melted or fluid mass, bursting upwards from the bowels of the earth. 
   On the other hand, the first part of the description I have given, clearly resolves this phenomenon into the effect of what is called in the aqueous theory, subsidence, of which it possesses all the data to form a case. Such an explanation, every appearance and circumstance connected with the subject, inclines me strongly to prefer, on the following grounds, which I submit with deference to the observation and judgment of geologists.
   I. Admitting the fusion of greenstone by heat, the mass in this case, considered as a mechanic  power, seems totally inadequate to the effect produced ; as it does not exceed a few feet in thickness, while the mass of strata displaced, is almost a square mile in extent, with a depth of at least a hundred yards.
   II. The relative position of the mass or vein, so far as it appears, is incompatible with the supposition of its having been the agent in this displacement. Had the greenstone followed the direction of the great chasm, appearing every where along the bottom, or in its vicinity, such an inference might have been plausible. But far otherwise, as already noticed, it runs almost directly across the hollow ; so that the fissure which has taken place, is nearly at right angles to that which the laws of mechanism would teach us to expect, from the presumed disruptive force of the greenstone. 
   III.	The strata fractured and separated, exhibit no marks of having been burst asunder by the power of explosion ; nor indeed any appearance, but what would naturally be found, in a case of subsidence or desiccation. Those on the upper or mountain side, preserve throughout their original position, which, with little exception, is almost horizontal, with their edges presented to the eye; and they seem to run backwards undisturbed into the body of the mountain : while, on the lower, or detached side, they have precisely the appearance and inclination which might be expected, if they had fallen off or slipped down from the higher mass, of which they originally formed a part. In confirmation of this hypothesis, it may be observed, that the precipitous front on the mountain-side, approaches in general much nearer to the perpendicular, than on the opposite side, which shelves so considerably that I was able at one place, not far from the centre, to clamber from the bottom up to the top.
   IV. Whether the Cartlane greenstone has been an eruption from below, or a deposition from above, or in whatever way we may suppose it to have been formed ; every thing in the appearance and position of the rock, demonstrates, that the greenstone itself also, must have originally beep a part of the great mountain-mass, previous to the period of its being rent as we now see it. In fact, the greenstone on the one side has evidently been broken off from the opposite as well as the sandstone. If so, the conclusion I have drawn, is unavoidable.
   V. To complete the evidence of this explanation, all the circumstances which strike the eye, in surveying the neighbourhood of the Cartlane Craig, and especially the great declivity towards the Clyde, which runs at a level of several hundred feet below, decidedly favour the opinion, that the separation of the rocky mass has been occasioned by its sinking on that side, where it had been left without support. From the lowest extremity of the great opening, to the bed of the Clyde, at the nearest point, there is a rapid descent of half a mile; and the course which the stream of the Mouse must have followed along the base of the dislocated mass on the outside, had no dislocation taken place, is too obvious to escape notice at first sight. This apparently original course, though unobstructed by the fundamental rock, is indeed entirely blocked up by a ridge of considerable height, on which the house of Baronald stands. It is plain, however, that this ridge has been formed only by the debris from the dislocated rock filling up the hollow behind it, and accumulating in the progress of time ; so that the water of the Mouse, after having probably been collected to some depth, in a large bason, still existing on the north-east of Baronald House, and presumed to have been the commencement of the original course, had been forced to work its passage through the present channel, which the displacement of the strata had opened to it, and which it has no doubt worn and deepened.
   Such are the reasons which induce me to adopt the explanation of this appearance, suggested by the principle of the aqueous theory. It may also be thought, that the effect of earthquake might be taken into account, as assisting the failure of support on the lower side. But without insisting further on such topics, I leave the solution now proposed, to the decision of future observers, whom curiosity may afterwards lead to visit a scene so remarkably striking and attractive to the eye of taste as well as of science. Points, in fact, of this nature, will not be decided satisfactorily, without the most accurate observation and experienced judgment, in the progress of geological knowledge.
   I have only to add, that the Cartlane sandstone may be described as belonging to the class of rocks immediately subsequent to grey-wacke, in the order of succession. It has in general, all the characters of old red sandstone, approaching to grey-wacke ; and it occurs alternating with that substance, among the undermost strata of the formation, as may be seen in the lower country along the banks of the Clyde above Lanark. The fragments it contains when coarse-grained, are angular pieces and rolled masses, of quartz, felspar, grey-wacke, clay-slate, jasper, flinty-slate, &c., often so large, that some of the beds may be regarded as conglomerates. But the greater portions of the strata are fine granular, composed of quartz, felspar, and mica, minutely aggregated, in some varieties without a base, in others with a cement of clay ; and the mixture is so pure, as to render these varieties excellent specimens of what Professor JAMESON is inclined to consider as true chemical depositions. Quartzy-sandstone also occurs, with facettes of felspar.
   In this formation, most of the rocks exhibit numerous scales of mica. We find in others, specks of embedded copper-pyrites. Lime, too, frequently appears in the lowest strata, pervading the substance of the rock, as a kind of base, or penetrating it in the form of cotemporaneous calc- spar veins. In the former case, we have what may be called arenaceous limestone, which may be found in the bed of the river above Clyde Bridge. Veins of heavy-spar sometimes occur. The variety of colours in the different strata, seems to depend on the greater or less abundance of iron.
  With regard to the trap-rock, of which the position has been described, its oryctognostic. characters do not exhibit much variety. The greatest mass, is a compact greenstone, intermixed with calc-spar : the smaller veins approach to basalt, with olivine and augite. Other varieties are intermediate between basalt and clinkstone ; and contain small portions of blackish-coloured clay, together with calc-spar, crystals of felspar, and little shining facettes of hornblende.
The examination of the Cartlane Craig, will always interest the mineralogist; and the fatigues of Mr LIGHTFOOT, in clambering over its broken rocks, were rewarded by the discovery of several rare and curious plants.
