IF the true ends of science be promoted rather by careful observation than by vague hypothesis, the Geognosy of Werner has peculiar claims to admiration. Without the lofty pretensions which constitute the chief distinction of some speculations, it has established general principles, which facilitate the labours of the student, and prompt to continued exertion. A system which developes the great laws of nature, and is substantially improved by the examination of her works, is of all others the best calculated to promote every science; and accordingly we find, that mineralogy has made the most rapid advances wherever this has been fairly adopted. Formerly, mineralogical inquiries produced nothing more than a mere catalogue of localities; but now many relations of individuals have been distinctly determined; others are daily ascertained, and the most doubtful will probably be accurately known at a period not very remote. The correctness of these observations, is shewn by the history of mineralogy within a very few years, during which there has been an immense accumulation of geognostic facts collected from portions of the whole known world. In Britain alone, has the comparative progress of the science been unequal to the apparent ardour with which it has been pursued, and unworthy of the example afforded by our indefatigable and justly distinguished President. With a view of contributing as far as it is in my power to remedy this deficiency, I have examined the interesting district of the Ochil Hills; and I now beg leave to lay the general results of that examination before the Society. In many instances they will be found imperfect and unsatisfactory. It would have been gratifying, had it been possible for me to have made them more complete; but as circumstances render that wish unavailing, I trust that others, whose opportunities may be more favourable, will be prompted to retrace my steps, to correct my errors, and to add new facts to those I shall detail.

- General Description.
  Modern geographers consider the Ochil Hills as the southern boundary of the Grampians; and in that point of view, the eastern portion may be traced to the Seedlay Hills; while the western extremity should be regarded as a mountain-arm stretching into the extensive valley which reaches from the verge of the Grampians, properly so called, to the shores of the Forth : but as the present object is to give a sketch of their particular structure, without entering more into their general relations than distinctness requires, it will be convenient to view them as a small mountain-group, which rises above the sea-port of Parton Craigs, on the right bank of the Tay, and, after having skirted the northern parts of Fifeshire, traversed Perthshire, bounded Kinross-shire and Clackmananshire, through a course of more than fifty miles, terminates on the river Allan, near Dunblane, in Stirlingshire.	
   This group consists of a high chain, the loftiest point of which, at its first rise, does not exceed three or four hundred feet; but more lofty f summits occur to the westward, until Bencleugh £ and Dalmyatt, rear their heads at an elevation of more 
than 52000 feet above the level of the sea. Several smaller chains may be traced in a course nearly parallel to that of the most elevated, particularly to the south, where they may be distinctly seen gradually diminishing, until they are lost in the adjacent valleys. In a few instances, as at the south-eastern extremity, they diverge from the general direction, forming small mountain-arms, which bound some lateral valleys of great fertility and beauty.
  The individuals of which this group is composed, are generally long round-backed hills, very richly covered with verdure, having occasionally conical and rarely tabular summits. Those of the first description, are most numerous between Parton Craigs and Abernethy, and those of the latter, between Dunning and the Yetts of Muckhart; and it is worthy of remark, that the former are more completely covered Up than any of the other hills.
  The acclivities look to the north, and are generally rapid, though there are some remarkable exceptions to this observation. The declivities are very gentle, except at Bencleugh, where they are in many places nearly precipitous. A very large proportion of the Ochil Hills are cultivated to the very summits, and nearly the whole of the remainder are excellent pasture. The natural consequence of this is, that there are few openings, except in an accidental quarry, or some rare natural exposure circumstances which embarrass the mineralogist in no common degree.
   The dip of the strata, with very few exceptions, is to the south-east, corresponding with the declivities ; and the direction from north-east to southwest, corresponding with the direction of the whole group, which runs about half of its course from east to west, and then, changing its direction, runs from north-east to south-west.
   Springs are very numerous throughout the whole of the Ochil Hills; in some instances they form pools, in others bogs, and in many they unite and give rise to several beautiful small streams, that meander through the neighbouring districts. The Devon, the Allan, and the May, are the most remarkable of these streamlets; and they pour their waters into the Forth, the Tay, and the Erne.
   The valleys are also numerous, separating the several chains, and the individual heights from each other. In general they are narrow, not exceeding thirty or forty yards in width; their length depends on that of the chain, or mountain which they bound. These valleys are most numerous at the western extremity of the Ochils,where they are also most extensive. They imperceptibly diminish both in size and importance to the eastward. It is, however, in the latter portion that the romantic valley occurs, in which the Lake of Lindores is contained. In this small spot, nature has crowded together all that can delight the eye, and elevate the imagination.
  The Qchil Hills are bounded to the north and north-west by the Frith of Tay, Strath-Erne, and Strath-Allan ; to the south-west by the vale of Forth ; to the south by the vales of Devon, of Kinross, and of Eden ; and to the east by the left bank of the Eden where it is lost in the right bank of the Tay.
  The prevailing rock throughout the whole of the northern boundaries, is a dark brick-red Sandstone, which extends as far as Callendar to the west, and to Stonehaven * to the east, and is in all probability the red sandstone. The independent coal formation, according to Mr Bald , forms the coal-field of Clackmananshire and Stirlingshire ; and the red sandstone, occasionally assuming the characters of conglomerate J, again occupies nearly the whole of the valleys of Kinross and Eden; while grey sandstone, slate-clay, bituminous shale, pitch-coal, and clay-ironstone, form the right bank of the Eden, to the south of St Andrew’s. On the left bank, which is more immediately contiguous to the Ochils, beds of sand, elay and marl have been observed.
   The rocks composing the Qchil Hills, occur in nearly the following order 
1. Red sandstone.
2. Amygdaloid.
3. Grey sandstone.
4. Limestone.
5. Slate-clay.
6. Claystone.
7. Tuff.
8. Basaltic clinkstone.
9. Greenstone.
10. Claystone porphyry.
11. Felspar porphyry.
12. Compact felspar. I.
I.	Red Sandstone.
   This rock occurs for the first time, in travelling from east to west, on the shore below Birkhill. It is also found in a quarry between Bambriech Castle, and Newburgh; in the small hills between Pitcaithly  and Dunning ; and to the westward of the latter place. Its colour is a dark brick-red, brownish red, and reddish grey. It is coarsegrained, occasionally it becomes conglomerated, as to the south of Dunning, where it rests on the reddish-grey sandstone, and contains considerable masses of quartz, fine-grained sandstone, and scales of silver-white mica. This sandstone is occasionally highly crystalline, bearing some resemblance to iron-flint. When the mica predominates, it assumes a slaty character, and decomposes into tables.
   It occurs distinctly stratified, dipping to the south-east, with an apparent direction from northeast to south-west. I have not seen it in connexion with any other rock, except below the Humbling Bridge in the course of the Devon, where it alternates with a tuff; and at the foot of the King’s Seat, near to the house of Harviestonf, where it rests immediately above a seam of slaty pitch-coal, six feet two inches thick. From the resemblance of its characters to those of another sandstone to be hereafter noticed, it is highly probable, that they will be found to belong to the same formation ; but as they have not been traced in distinct connexion, it maybe well to keep them separate at present At the base of Alva hill, it seems to lie below greenstone.
  In a small valley which traverses the Ochils, between Wormit Bay, and a lateral valley that divide? Newton hill from Sanford hill, there are several small hillocks of an ironshot sand, which contains masses of this sandstone. It is probable, that they have been derived from the decomposition of the red sandstone just described.
  Although it has not been accurately determined, it is highly probable, that this red sandstone, from the number of points at which it occurs, and the coincidence between its characters and those of the old red sandstone which occupies the adjacent valleys, that they will be hereafter found to be intimately connected. At present, I shall hesitate to fix the place of this rock in the system, and content myself with observing, that it seems to be the lowest of the series composing the Ochil Hills. 
II. Amygdaloid.
On the shore between Parton Craigs and Balmerino, (a district of nearly nine miles), a coarse Amygdaloid gradually passes into a finer variety of the same rock. The former of these consists v chiefly of portions of the latter, binding together various substances. I could not discover the thickness of any of the beds} but I apprehend, from having seen a different rock at a small height above it, that it is inconsiderable. The basis of this rock is a greyish-green clay stone, occasionally very much ironshot. The numerous cavities contained in it, are lined with white amethyst, flesh- red calcareous spar, white felspar, chalcedony, red hint, and common quartz. The chalcedony appears to have been first deposited, and the quartz to have been the last.
   The amygdaloid sometimes becomes porphyrytic, containing crystals of felspar.
   It is difficult to assign to this rock its correct geognostic position. At Parton Craigs, it is below claystone porphyry. Near Newport, it alternates with basaltic clinkstone. At the western extremity of Wormit Bay, it is below the claystone, through which it seems to be connected with the tuff on the one hand, and with the claystone porphyry on the other. On the water of Fargs, which runs from Damhead  to Abernethy, it occurs resting on a variety of greenstone, which is connected with the clinkstone. In this last situation, it possesses a great variety of characters, being extremely coarse at one point, where a bed of clay-porphyry rests upon it. More to the southward, the vesicles in the amygdaloid become very distinct, and contain a flesh-red variety of felspar.
   This rock is traversed by veins of calcareous spar, which exhibit a sea-green colour, when fresh broken.
III. Grey Sandstone.
   Above the amygdaloid, beds of a yellowish grey sandstone alternate with tuff and claystone, which appear to be intimately connected with some varieties of the amygdaloidal rock. It contains a considerable quantity of scales of silver- white mica, and decomposes into slaty masses. It seems to pass almost imperceptibly into the varieties of claystone to be hereafter described. One variety of this rock has a very remarkable granitic appearance, and does in fact contain all the constituents essential to true granite. At the same time, however, it retains the distinctive characters of sandstone.
   The relations of this rock to the older rocks, is not clearly made out, except at Wormit Bay, where it seems to rest on amygdaloid. It occurs frequently between Wormit Bay, and the village of Dunning in Perthshire. It also occurs in the course of the Devon, where it may be seen alternating with the red sandstone, to which in all probability it belongs.
* At the western extremity of Wormit Bay.

   Its general dip is to the south-east, and its direction from north-east to south-west.
IV. Limestone.
   In a quarry at the base of Park Hill, not far from Bambriech Castle a saddle-shaped mass of yellowish grey Limestone rests, between beds of slate-clay and grey sandstone and above the newest sandstone, there is a bed of greenstone, the upper part of which is much decomposed. This limestone varies from an earthy to a highly crystalline structure, resembling if not passing into calcareous spar.
   This is the only instance throughout tbe whole of the Ochils that I have seen limestone, although I have been assured, that other portions of it have been observed at a considerable elevation above the village of Abernethy. On examining the situations to which I was referred, I could discover no traces of limestone ; from which I have been induced to suspect, that the popular belief is unfounded. 
 

V. Slate-Clay,
   Thin seams of a bluish-grey Slate-clay, possessing the common characters, occur both above and below the limestone, separating it fronl the grey sandstone.
   .	VI. Claystone.
   This is a very abundant rock, and some very beautiful varieties of it occur in the course of the Ochil Hills. At Lucklaw, it appears to pass into basaltic clinkstone; below Birkhill it alternates with sandstone, tuff and felspar, passing on the one hand into the grey sandstone, and on the other, through all the varieties of tuff and clinkstone, to the perfectly compact felspar. It is also found between the Yetts of Muckhart and Alva, below the clinkstone, with which it probably alternates.
   It is fine-grained, having a large flat conchoidal fracture, and an uneven cross Tracture. It occasionally contains scales of silver-white mica, particularly where it alternates with the sandstone and tuff, as it does below Birkhill. The colour is various, even in the alternating strata; the most common, however, is between pearl grey and isabella yellow. It sometimes, though rarely, is amygdaloidal: the cavities of such varieties, are filled with green earth, and white calcareous spar: crystallised felspar is dispersed throughout the mass.
   The claystone alternates with the grey sandstone and the tuff, between which it is most probably the connecting link ; for it passes almost imperceptibly at its extremities into each of them. It is doubtful, whether or not the claystone be of older formation than the limestone, as I have seen both in similar relations to the sandstone. The present location, therefore, of these rocks, in so far as they regard each other, must, until more extended observations shall have been made, be considered as entirely arbitrary.
vii. Tuff.:
   A very remarkable tufacious rock occurs above the claystone at the base of Birkhili, and at the western extremity of Wormit Bay. In both of these situations, it alternates with the sandstone and claystone. In no other part of the Ochils have I observed a similar arrangement.
   This tuff is coarse, inclosing portions of felspar, which is sometimes lost in the prevailing mass. The chief colours are, flesh-red and Isabella yellow. It appears to be one of the newest members of the sandstone series, and there is a gradual passage from ft to the claystone. It is distinctly stratified, having the general dip, direction, and inclination of the whole mountain-group,
VIII. Basaltic Clinkstone.
   From the first rise to the final termination of the Ochil Hills, Clinkstone is the prevailing rock, It occurs at Parton Craigs, resting on, and in one instance alternating with, the amygdaloid; from Craig-in-Crune, (half way between Woodhaven and Newburgh,) it forms the summits of the hills, occasionally exhibiting columns of more than 100 feet in height, which rise precipitously from the low lands on the south bank of the Tay, and produce a noble and imposing effect *. At the more western portions of this district, the clinkstone is connected with greenstone, felspar porphyry, and compact felspar. At Westertoun, immediately above the junction with the coal-field of Clack- mananshire, it occurs distinctly stratified, the beds being separated from each other by thin seams of leek-green steatite, which contains iron pyrites in considerable abundance. It occasionally assumes the characters of basalt: at other times, it is more decidedly clinkstone ; but it most generally possesses characters intermediate between those of basalt and clinkstone; from which circumstance, I have been induced to adopt the name of Basaltic Clinkstone, which applies equally to every variety.
   Its colours are blackish-grey, blackish-brown, and sometimes it is much ironshot, particularly at the summits of the lower hills. Its fracture is slaty and rough, and in general it emits the clinking sound to which the species owes its name. Beautiful specimens of an amygdaloidal variety occur between Abernethy and Kinross.
   The dip and direction of the stratified portions of this clinkstone, correspond with the general dip and direction.
 IX. Greenstone.
   Throughout the district which extends from Parton Craigs to Newburgh, the clinkstone frequently passes into greenstone ; and in the immediate vicinity of the latter place, it appears distinctly columnar, though its relations to every other rock are wholly undefined.
   It is not improbable, from similar greenstone being found in higher portions of the hills between Newburgh and Woodhaven, that it alternates with the clinkstone. Between Dunning and the Yetts of Muckhart, it occurs frequently above the clinkstone, and below felspar-porphyry ; but is seen in greatest abundance, variety, beauty, and distinctness between the Yetts of Muckhart and the western extremity of the Ocbils, particularly in an exposure made by a streamlet which divides the King’s Seat from Craiginnan f, and in a section above the village of Westertoun. In this district, it forms separate hills, or their caps, and in the central parts of the group, it alternates distinctly stratified with the basaltic clinkstone, which it connects with the felspar rock through the felspar porphyry. The section above Westertoun, may be considered a beautiful epitome of these alternations, and it receives an additional interest from its exhibiting a fine view of the junctions of the Coal-field, with the newer rocks. The beds of greenstone have a dip and direction at right angles, to the dip and direction of the clinkstone, from which it is separated by thin seams of decomposing steatite. The beds of the greenstone itself are also separated by thin seams of this steatite, which contains considerable quantity of iron pyrites. The gradation * from the rock in which the hornblende predominates to that in which a beautiful ftesh-red felspar prevails, is marked in a series of six alternating portions of greenstone and clinkstone, which commence at the above-named section, and may be traced in the face of Bencleugh beyond Alva.
   It is worth recording, that a bed of greenstone occurs in a coarse conglomerated rock in the hill of Balcanquhal f. It is of small extent, and may be seen in all sides except at its base. There can therefore be no doubt of its relations to the rock in which it is imbedded, from the characters of which it may be fairly presumed, that it does not owe its existence to volcanic agency J.
   The characters of the greenstone, are those which commonly occur, except in the higher alternating beds, where they assume those of the rock, which Mr Jameson calls Sienitic Greenstone. It is occasionally porphyritic, containing fine and indistinct crystals of rutilite.
X. Clay stone-Porphyry.
   On the south side of the Abernethy hills, a bed of flesh-red claystone porphyry, with crystals of glassy felspar, is above the clinkstone, and some varieties of greenstone, but its relations are wholly undefined.
XI. Felspar-Porphyry
Forms the caps of the highest hills which lie between Dunning and Dunblane. It is a compact flesh-red felspar, containing crystals of white calcareous spar. In the course of the streamlet which runs past Castle Campbell, it alternates with greenstone. It occurs in decomposed fragments on the summits of Craiginnan, King’s Seat, Bencleugh, and Dalmyatt. These decomposed fragments have a vesicular appearance, from a very obvious cause, (the rapid decomposition of the included crystals). This appearance would no doubt be ascribed to volcanic agency, by those whose zeal for hypothesis outstrips their love of accuracy.
  Only the lower portions of this rock contain crystals of hornblende, which give way at the higher points to those of calcareous spar.
XII. Compact Felspar.
  Very beautiful brick-red and flesh-red compact felspar, possessing all the usual characters, forms the caps of some of the smaller hills of the southern chain of the Ochils, which extends from the neighbourhood of Dollar, to the banks of the Eden. Near Cupar, it occurs so abundantly, as to be the sole material for repairing the roads. It appears to be the newest member of the series, and to correspond both in its individual characters, and in its geognostic relations with the felspar of the Pentland Hills, where it was first noticed forming distinct masses by Professor Jameson. At the summit of Lucklaw, this felspar passes into hornstone. A solitary bed of it is to be found in the alternating series of sandstone, claystone, and tuff, in Wormit Bay.
VEINS.
  Having thus briefly noticed the prevailing rocks, I I shall now mention the veins traversing these rocks, in the order of the strata in which they occur. Contemporaneous veins are not uncommon in the clinkstone and greenstone; but true veins are more rare. The following is the order of the latter:
Calcareous Spar.
   Highly crystallised varieties of the calcareous spar traverse the clinkstone, near Woodhaven, and the claystone near to the Rumbling Bridge. It has a greenish tint, and all the usual characters. The dip and direction not easily determined. The thickness from half an inch to two inches.
Steatite.
   Veins of this steatite, varying from one to two inches, divide the strata of the clinkstone, and of the greenstone, at the section above Westertoun and Alva. They occasionally contain iron-pyrites crystallised, in cubes, in considerable quantities.

Heavy-Spar.
   Straight lamellar heavy-spar is the veinstone of the mine behind Castle Campbell, of those of Alva Hill, and Airthry Hill, in all of which it traverses the newer varieties of the clinkstone, which approach to felspar through the greenstone. They are four or six feet wide, with their outgoings to the south. Dip near 45® to the northeast ; but from the falling in of the roofs and other accidents, it was impossible for me to ascertain any particulars respecting them. It is in these veins of heavy-spar, that the cobalt, silver, copper, and lead, have been deposited. Of the two first of these, I could discover no trace; though there is no doubt that both have been obtained in considerable quantity. The fullest account I have been able to meet with of the silver mines, is that contained in Sir John Sinclair’s Statistical Account of Scotland, under the head Alva. Of the cobalt, I have seen no published account. It appears, that both these metals were found in the Alva Hill.
   Copper and lead are still to be found both in the mine behind Castle Campbell, and in the mines of Alva. But the specimens (which alone I could procure) at the entrance, are so much acted upon by the weather, that I cannot venture to attempt any description of the varieties of ore that occur. The first named of these mines has been twice opened since the year 1760, but has been abandoned on both occasions. But it is not determined, whether or not the want of success has arisen from mismanagement, or from the unproductiveness of the mine. From their present state, I found it impossible to make any accurate observations on them.	
   Such are the most important facts that I have noticed in the examination I have been able to give to the Ochils. Although the information I have collected be imperfect, I trust that the Society will receive it as a pledge of my readiness to contribute all that I can to the science of mineralogy. It may be expected, that I should assign the geognostic place of the Ochils. With the limited observations that I have made, I could do no more than throw out conjectures, which would not conduce to the legitimate ends of science. Until more extended examinations shall have been made, I must beg leave to confine myself to a simple narrative of facts.

