IT may be proper to state, that it is owing to the encouragement held out by Colonel Colby to notice objects connected with science, where so doing does not interfere with the progress of the survey, that these fossils were collected.
   In Mr. Murchison’s work on the Silurian System the rocks of South Pembroke are described, and some general observations are made on those of North Pembroke ; and in his map the lower beds of the Llandeilo Flags range from Camrose on the west to Llandewy Velfry on the east.
   Taking this line as a base for our observations, commencing at Llawhaden, a little north of Canaston Bridge (fig. 2. p. 559), where the dip is northerly, and proceeding towards Precelly Mountain, we cross a conglomerate, which may be traced in a westerly direction to Ford, where it is found in contact with the trap ; and in an easterly direction towards Llangan, where a stratified, conglomerate sandstone occurs, containing species of Trilobites and of Orthis or Spirifer.
   To this conglomerate succeed first sandstone and sandstone shales, dipping to the north; and then, nearer Clarbeston, carbonaceous shales, containing casts of fossil shells and Graptolites, overlaid by limestone. The line of section afterwards crosses another bed of sandstone, which is succeeded by roofing-slates that extend nearly to Llys-y-fran.	
   Similar carbonaceous shales may also be seen to the west of the line of section at St. Catherine’s Bridge, near Camrose, and at Rudbaxton; also at Long Ford, south of Llandysilio, to the east of the section.
   These shales bear so strong a resemblance to the coal-measures, that unsuccessful excavations have been made in them at Rudbaxton, Clarbeston, and Clynderwen, south-east of Llandysilio.
   Indications of an anticlinal line may be seen near Narberth and Camrose, also at Solfach, to the south-east, and Porthlliskey, to the south-west of St. David’s; at the latter village the dip becomes westward, and continues changing to Whitesand Bay, where it assumes a northerly inclination, as may be observed at St. Lawrence, thirteen miles east of St. David’s Head, Leweston, three miles south of St. Lawrence, Camrose, and Long Ford, about two and a half miles south of Llandysilio; the line is broken at Roche, five miles south-west of St. Lawrence, and at Leweston by the intrusive trap.
  Graptolites were found at Robleston, in the parish of Camrose, in calcareous shales, near their junction with the trap of Plumstone.
  Resuming the section at Llys-y-fran and proceeding towards Dinas Head, roofing-slates alternate with trap, decomposed on the surface, and masses of apparently intrusive greenstone are likewise visible: these traps and slates have been traced for miles to the east and west of the line, the schists dipping with remarkable uniformity to the north. This would lead to the supposition that the trap was contemporary with the slates, but the cursory view obtained on the surface prevents any certain conclusion being formed.
  The slates at Abereiddy Bay (sect. fig. 1.) contain Graptolites, as observed by Professor Sedgwick; and two species appear, from Mr.Lonsdale’s examination, to be identical with the Graptolithus Murchisonii and foliaceus of the Llandeilo Flags.
  In the same bay are found numerous specimens of an Euomphalus, which bear some resemblance to one of the specimens represented by fig. 13. Plate XXII. of the Silurian System; also specimens of a Lingula, but distinct from the Llandeilo Flags, species figured by Mr. Murchison.
  The beds, which are worked for roofing-slate at Abereiddy Bay, are inclined highly to the north, the line of bearing being from north-east to south-west; and though they differ in mineral character, as well as dip, from the general inclination of the Llandeilo Flags, yet this difference may have been produced by the action of the trap, which intersects them in a north-east and south-west direction, and between Abereiddy and St. David’s occupies nearly the whole surface.
  Overlying these slates, to the north, but with many beds of trap, slates, and sandstones between them, having the prevailing northerly dip, we find the conglomerate of Dinas Head (fig. 1.), Newport Bay, and Trewiddel, near Cardigan, composed of fragments of various rocks, cemented by a grit of trappean aspect, and resembling certain conglomerates described by Mr. Murchison as occurring in the Caradoc sandstone.
  The organic remains hitherto obtained from these beds are not very satisfactory, but the most prevailing fossil is the cast of a crinoidal stem, composed of numerous thin joints with interspaces at irregular distances; the best specimen of which, procured at Trewiddel, near Cardigan, Mr. Lonsdale considers analogous to specimens obtained by Mr. Murchison from the Caradoc sandstone, at Little London, May Hill, and Corton near Presteign. See Silurian system, pi. 20. fig. 19.
   This conglomerate commences at Dinas Head, and crossing Newport Bay, continues to the hill above Trewiddel, near Cardigan, and probably further.
   It does not appear to be disturbed by igneous rocks.
   Trappean ash is found near the conical elevations of intrusive greenstone at Penbury Hill, two and a half miles north-north-east of St. David’s, Llanllawer, two miles south-east of Fishguard, and Carningley, one mile south of Newport.
   It is provincially called toughstone, and is worked as a building material, being soft when first raised, but hardening by exposure to the air, and very durable. Though the summit of the principal elevation of the Pembrokeshire chain is not trap, but roofing-slate, yet beds of trap extend nearly to the top, and are continuous apparently throughout the district, having masses of more decided greenstone occasionally protruded through them.
   These beds may be traced to Plumstone Mountain, five miles north-west of Haverfordwest, and to St. David’s Head, and thence through “The Bishop and his Clerks Rocks,” and the dangerous rocks called “The Hats and Barrels,” to the rock of “ The Smalls Lighthouse.”
   On the north-east of the chain, at Whitchurch (Eglwyswen), six miles northeast from Newport, on the east at Llanfirnach (Llanfrynach, Ord. Map), and on the south at Llanglywdwen, are beds of a dark carbonaceous shale, which apparently overlie and mantle round the trap rocks, yet still preserve the northerly dip. These beds have been worked unsuccessfully for culm, and are accompanied by lead veins, one of which at Llanfirnach has proved to be profitable.
   At Llanglywdwen Bridge are indications of copper, and a considerable bed of limestone is in contact with the lode.
   Mineral veins were also observed along the coast, from Newgate in St. Bride’s Bay to St. David’s Head.
   At Fishguard and Strumble Head are basaltic columns, and at Llanwnda a jasper vein, and veins of green compact felspar.



