INTRODUCTION.
THE principal objects of the following paper are, to submit to the Society an account of a series of fossils discovered in the eastern part of the great basaltic district of India; and to endeavour to arrive at some approximate conclusion respecting the geological era of this basaltic formation, which, extending over more than 200,000 square miles, conceals, breaks up, or alters all the other rocks from beneath which it has forced its way. Of the eruptions to which this rich and romantic country (formerly including several considerable kingdoms) owes its existingform, a late President of this Society remarks*, that the mind is almost lost in the contemplation “of their grandeur;” but “that unfortunately the relative age of the eruptions must remain for the present undetermined, no vestiges of secondary or tertiary formations having been detected within the region.” Having therefore, in 1832, collected a series of lacustrine fossils, probably referable to the tertiary epoch, from a portion of this district extending 140 miles north and south, and having procured others from localities to the north and west of that which furnished my own collection, I am induced to submit the specimens to the Society*. If they should be deemed of sufficient value, I wish a selection to be deposited in the museum, to afford a means of comparison with a duplicate set, which 1 shall forward to the Asiatic Society of Bengal.
   But it is not alone by supplying some data from which to infer the relative age of the great trap formation, that these specimens are valuable. They will afford the means of connecting the great sandstone formations of the south and north of India, containing the celebrated diamond mines of Parteal (Golcondah,) Bangnapilly, and Panna, as well as the limestones and schists associated with them ; and which, from the latitude of Madras to the banks of the Ganges, exhibit the same characters, and are broken up or elevated by granite or trap rocks, in no respect differing in mineralogical characters or geological relations. A few remarks on these formations, and the physical geography of the countries in which they occur, will be a necessary introduction to a more particular account of that portion of the trap district in which the fossils were found, Mr. Calder’s sketch not being sufficiently detailed, and the map attached to his memoir containing some errors of material importance.

   An elevated tract to the north-west of Bundlecund (not included within the range of the Map, PI. XLVI.) may be considered as the geological connexion between the provinces watered by the southern branches of the Ganges and the Deckan, including all the countries to the south of the Nerbudda. From the north of this plateau, which extends far to the west, a number of great rivers descend, by a series of rapids and falls over sandstone escarpments, into the valley of the Jumna and the Ganges. From the east and south of the same tract, the Mahanuddy river collects a great body of water, and after a comparatively short course through countries little known, but containing the diamond mines of Sumblepoor and extensive trap and gneiss formations, empties itself into the Bay of Bengal, not far south of the Delta of the Ganges.
   The Nerbudda, which flows in an opposite direction, is more interesting in a political and geological point of view; and the extensive countries through which it passes have been more carefully investigated than any other part of the Peninsula. This river takes its rise to the west of Amerkantack, and traversing a country of granite, sandstone, and basalt, abounding in iron and the finest dolomitic marbles, reaches the Indian Ocean through the alluvial plains of Guzerat. At Jabulpoor and in the neighbourhood of Saugur, fossil mammalia, shells, and silicified palms have been recently discovered. Fossil shells have
also been found in some of the trap hills, which have broken up the sandstone near the sources of the Taptee. This river is separated from the Nerbudda by a range of basaltic mountains ; and having the same direction as the Nerbudda, its whole course appears to be in the basaltic formation. (See N.W. corner of Map, PI. XLVI.)
  All the other great rivers of the Peninsula, including the Godavery, Kistnah, Pennar, and Cauvary issue from the western Ghats, from the summits of which the country slopes gradually to the east, except at the extreme south, where the descent to the plains of the Carnatic is considerable and precipitous. The Godavery (see Map, PI. XLVI.) rises in the basaltic region described
by Colonel Sykes, (Geol. Trans. Vol. IV. pt. 2, 1836) and, greatly increased in size, it enters the granitic table land of the Deckan, and flows at the southern foot of the Sichel Mountains into a sandstone and argillaceous limestone country. This district is similar to that of Bundlecund and Malwa; it also contains diamonds, and has been much broken up by erupted rocks. From
the north, the Godavery derives large supplies of water from the great rivers rising south of the Nerbudda and the Taptee, in basaltic tracts, the soil of which being retentive of moisture, the water is everywhere near the surface. From the south it receives only the Munjerah river, which, flowing through arid granitic plains, furnishes but a scanty addition of water, except
during the rainy season. Through a pass in the gneiss mountain of Papconduh it enters the plains of the Coromandel coast. In this district the sandstone reappears, at an elevation little above that of the sea ; but basaltic hills, several hundred feet in height, in which marine fossils have recently been discovered, exist almost within the delta formed by its sediment.
  The Kistnah derives its waters from a number of considerable rivers, rising in the basaltic and gneiss summits of the western Ghats, which condense the greater part of the clouds carried by the south-west monsoon from the Indian Ocean. Flowing through the territories of the southern Mahrattas, a country covered with a rich basaltic soil, and abounding in schistose limestone,
sandstone, granitic rocks, and basalt, it enters the granitic platform of the Deckan, the limits of which in this direction are unknown. The limestones and sandstones, however, soon reappear on descending the river, and extend across to the basin of the Pennar, and as far as the ascent to the granitic platform of the Mysore. It is on the banks of the Kistnah that the richest diamond mines occur, and that the sandstones acquire their greatest elevation, amounting to more than 3000 feet ; the river passing through mural precipices of this rock and of the schistose limestones to be presently described. It then enters the plains of the Carnatic, where the same rocks occur, sometimes a little elevated above the level of the sea, at others forming the caps of granite mountains, or broken up by varieties of greenstone and basalt. Thence, passing through a narrow gorge in the gneiss hills of Bezwarrah, it enters the alluvial plains continuous with the delta of the Godavery. Its waters, however, are more loaded with mud than the last-mentioned beautiful river, and the deposit of new land may be seen, by the inspection of a common map, to be proportionably great.
  The Pennar is comparatively a small stream, but of much geological interest, the greater part of its waters being derived from the districts in which the diamond sandstones and the argillaceous limestones, on which they rest, are exhibited in their most characteristic forms, and where they are most easily investigated. To describe these strata in detail would be out of place here; but a few of the leading facts must be stated, that the identity of the formations with those of the fossiliferous district, more immediately the object of this paper, may be rendered manifest. Like all the rivers of Southern India, granite is frequently seen in the bed of the Pennar, more especially in its southern branches, where the passes of Ryachottee lead to the granitic table land of Mysore, having an elevation of 3000 feet above the sea, or 2500 above Cuddapah, the principal town of the Pennar basin. With these exceptions, and the occasional appearance of trap through the stratified rocks, the rest of its course, till it approaches the sea, is over rich plains of black and saline alluvium, derived from the decomposition of basalt and of the stratified rocks so often referred to. Prom these plains numerous table lands, insulated eminences, and ranges of hills, having for the most part a direction nearly N.E. and S.W., rise abruptly, presenting mural precipices of difficult access, around the base of which the roads often make extensive circuits. The Nulla Mulla hills extending from the Mysore frontier to the basins of the Kistnah and Godavery, and the minor ranges dependent on them, and having the same composition and direction, are crossed at right angles by the Pennar, which makes its way through them, like the Kistnah, by traversing narrow gorges with perpendicular sides.
  There is not a more remarkable phenomenon in the district watered by the Pennar than the horizontal summits of many of the ranges, and the distinct manner in which the continuity of the strata can be traced from one hill to another, although extensive plains intervene; while, at no great distance, the sandstone which forms the summits of these hills is seen on the same level as the surrounding plains. Numerous instances also occur in which the original continuity of the horizontal summits is easily traced; the strata on the opposite and nearly perpendicular sides of a valley being similar, but having a considerable dip, the beds descend to the general level of the country. A good example of this is seen, in Section 2, Pl.XLVI.,atChintagoouta and Gun- dicottah. These anomalies were at first quite inexplicable, nothing appearing in the valleys but a rich alluvium, nor on the summits (which are reached with much difficulty) but a sandstone perfectly horizontal, and divided into huge tables by perpendicular partings, sometimes separated several feet from each other, and filled with broken pieces of the rock. This jointed structure is common to the sandstone, the schistose beds on which it for the most part immediately reposes, and the stratified limestone into which these schists pass insensibly ; but the size of the tables so formed, varies from rhombs of a few inches, in the schist and lower part of the sandstone, to enormous masses on the summits of the hills. Nowhere is this structure and the succession of strata, of which it is characteristic, better seen than in the table land in which are situated the celebrated diamond mines of Bangnapilly and others now deserted. The accompanying wood-cut will give some idea of one of these mines.
  The plains at the base of the table land of Bangnapilly consist of a rich black alluvium, containing fragments of basalt, jasper, and the various minerals found in the hills. It rests on a fine, compact, dark blue or nearly black limestone, which contains much argillaceous and siliceous matter. This limestone abounds with springs, and is in some places so cavernous as to afford passage to subterranean streams. Basalt protrudes in a few places near Bangnapilly. On ascending the hill, the limestone becomes more schistose, and is of a paler colour, gradually approaching in its structure and composition to clay slate, but it is far more friable. On the schist a more or less compact sandstone rests, varying very much in colour, composition, and appearance in different places. Above Bangnapilly it contains the diamond breccia described by Voysey. As far as the shafts which I had an opportunity of observing, enabled me to judge, the breccia is not an interstratified rock, but an intermixture of the common sandstone, in different parts of the same stratum, with larger fragments of older rocks, generally rounded but sometimes angular. It is not, however, the object of this paper to describe the mines and the interesting district in which they occur further than is necessary to exhibit the type of the formation, by the study of which I was enabled to understand more clearly, the less distinct appearances exhibited by the same rocks, where they have been invaded or buried by the great basaltic eruptions of Central India. On the opposite or west side of the valley, the hill is composed of the same argillo-calcareous formation; but, according to Colonel Cullen, “ instead of a sandstone cap, it is crested in its whole length with a sharp black ridge of trap rock, formed of loose blocks piled upon each other, the apparent base of which observed a pretty uniform level, nor is the ridge of much depth. Its extreme narrowness, deep black colour, and the total absence of all traces of vegetation, formed a singular contrast to the rest of the hills, which were covered with long dry grass and scattered bushes.” At a small pass some miles further to the west, the road in ascending, passes over first the dark limestone and a narrow' belt of schist, then trap, which is again succeeded by limestone, and the latter by schist, nearly to the summit, “ which is capped with a rock of a beautiful flesh colour, with specks and shades of a beautiful green, as if connected with its vicinity to the trap, and of so close and fine a texture as to appear homogeneous even with a lens.” “ The descent of the pass on the opposite side consists of a clay slate nearly to the foot, where the limestone reappears, and these two rocks continued to alternate with each other to the foot of the second Ghat, which, like all the former, was composed of clay slate capped with quartzose sandstone.”
The sandstone exhibits many varieties of grain, colour, and hardness : in some places it is white or red, and can be cut into pillars and slabs of great size and beauty ; in others it is soft and friable, and its inferior beds are not unfrequently schistose, so as to be with difficulty distinguished from the subjacent rock, with which it has in one or two places been observed to alternate. Where the sandstone approaches the great granitic tracts to the south and west, it passes into a compact quartzose rock, as is seen on both sides of the Tripatty Valley. This passage is also observed in other places, as near the Cuddapah diamond mines, where the plentiful occurrence of basaltic pebbles shows the neighbourhood of the trap. Besides the diamond conglomerate, consisting of a great variety of minerals, seams of rock crystal occur, and a fine white quartz containing argentiferous galena, which in former times furnished the country with lead. Specular and micaceous magnetic iron ores, but’containing much peroxide, and common iron pyrites, occur with the galena. As far as I have observed, the sandstone always rests conformably on the schists, although from its jointed structure it occasionally, when elevated, appears to meet the subjacent rock at a more or less obtuse angle.
   The schists on which the sandstone rests, vary very remarkably in colour, being in different places blue, red, green, or pure white, in which they seem to bear some relation to the incumbent sandstone. They are also occasionally flinty or jaspideous. Sometimes they are wanting, the sandstone resting directly on the limestone, of which the schists are evidently merely the upper beds, and into which they pass insensibly, although it seldom happens that considerable effervescence does not occur on examination by tests. It is in many places impossible to say to which portion of the series any particular specimen belongs.
   Voysey has classed the schists with the sandstone under the name of “(the clay slate formation ;)” I have, however, preferred to designate the deposit “ argillaceous limestone,” a term used by him in one of his sections as applicable to the limestone, and which well expresses not only the general character of the rock, but that also of the upper schistose beds.
   The limestone is a compact rock, but the strata are usually thin, and are often intersected by vertical partings, a circumstance which frequently limits its use in ornamental architecture. Its most common colour is a light blue, passing into black ; but it occasionally occurs of a nearly pure white, and affords an admirable material for basso-relievos. On this stone the finest sculptures of the ruined city of Amrawuty are executed, and for delicacy of workmanship they have perhaps never been surpassed. Were it not for the occurrence of small crystals of quartz, the same quarries would furnish an excellent lithographic stone. Near Cuddapah the dark variety is the common building stone, and many fine columns, caryatides, and cisterns are composed of it. The stone is applied to the same objects in the southern Mahratta country, and along the course of the Godavery towards Nagpoor.
  'To the south and east of Cuddapah, a narrow valley, nearly J50 miles in length, extends through the limestone, the strata of which are in some places nearly vertical, but form rounded hills. In others they are capped by sandstone, which exhibits mural precipices of much grandeur, and almost or entirely inaccessible. The strata, for the most part, dip to the N.W., resting on the granite of the Carnatic. This rock is penetrated by many dikes of greenstone, which have evidently been instrumental in elevating the stratified rocks to their present singular positions. Little has yet been ascertained regarding the thickness of these strata, which differ much even in the same range of hills. The only minerals they have been ascertained to yield, are varieties of quartz and iron pyrites, the latter of which is so abundant in a few localities, that sulphuris manufactured from it. At Jumulmudagoo I found the limestone interstratified with muriate of soda; and it is therefore probable, that the salt diffused through the alluvial soil so extensively as to render the water of the Pennar brackish duringthe hot season, and the inhabitants independent of the sea-coast for a supply of that article, is derived from this source.
   On emerging from the gorge in the Nulla Mulla range, the Pennar enters the plains of the Carnatic, and near its mouth flows through low hills of late- rite. This deposit rests on the ordinary granite of the Carnatic, with its associated sienites, hornblende schist, quartz rock, and mica slate. It is in a rock composed of a mixture of the last two minerals, that the copper-mines of the Nellore district are situated *. In the same neighbourhood, the sandstone and argillaceous limestones are little elevated above the sea, and are continuous with the same rocks on each side of the Kistnah. They are broken through by insulated basaltic hills, in the neighbourhood of which subterranean sounds and frequent local earthquakes are reported to occur; an assertion I am the more inclined to believe, having myself experienced two slight shocks during a casual visit to the district.
   Having briefly described some of the more remarkable phenomena exhibited by the southern portion of the great sandstone and argillaceous limestone formations, it will be unnecessary to enter into any detail when we meet with the same rocks to the north of the Godavery in connexion with the fossil beds discovered in the great basaltic district.
   With regard to the granitic platform of the Deckan, which intervenes between the Kistnah and Godavery, much accurate information is already before the public; it will therefore be necessary only to observe, that it is intersected by numerous greenstone dikes (sometimes of greenstone porphyry), having for the greater part a direction from S. by E. to N. by W., and not very different from that of several of the ranges of basaltic mountains to the north.
   These dikes, and the detached masses connected with them, are entirely composed of a crystalline compound of hornblende and felspar, without distinct crystals of augite; and I have never detected olivine in them. The rock shows a tendency to separate into spheres composed of concentric layers and into irregular prisms ; and the same structure in some degree occurs in the granite, syenite, pegmatite, &c. of the whole of the south of India. The greenstone is exceedingly hard and difficult to work, but it takes a most beautiful and durable polish, as in the magnificent mausoleums of Golcondah, the tombs of Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sultan, at Seringapatam, and in many of the sculptures of the Carnatic pagodas-]-. Where these dikes rise into hills, the summits only are composed of the compact greenstone, which graduates below into the granite of the surrounding country. Many of the veins of basalt in the passes of the Mysore and Neilgherry mountains differ from these, in possessing the structure of the compact basalt of Bombay and other places in the trap countries, and in branching into narrow veins, (often not an inch thick,) which traverse the granite without mixing with it; while the ordinary greenstone dikes of the Deckan are almost always accompanied by separate nodules, of greater or less dimensions, insulated in the granitic mass, the component parts of which appeared to me to be there, in most cases, arranged in larger crystals, and to be more subject to decay, than in other places. I could not resist the inference, that, at the time of the formation of these dikes, the granite was in a state approaching to fluidity; although, as some of the narrow veins can be traced for many miles through the granite, they do not appear to have been formed at the same time.
   Several small basaltic hills are insulated in the granitic platform in the line of route between Hyderabad and Nirmul, and they are based on decaying granite. Their flat summits and sleep sides correspond with the hills of the great trap district; and the general line of bearing, of the broken ranges of which they appear to form a part, does not differ much from that of the basaltic mountains to the north, or from the greenstone dikes ; but many hills are scattered over the plains to the east and west, and cross this line of route in every direction. The lower part of the hills is composed of thin tables or laminae of a sonorous trap, and the upper of globular concentric basalt; the external layers of which are extremely friable, generally grayish, or soft and soapy to the feel, and are of a greenish tint, except where the stone is much loaded with ferruginous grains of a reddish brown colour. In some places the metallic matter has the appearance of having been partially smelted, and is of a fine red hue.
   The nuclei of the “ concentric basalt,” which are exceedingly tough, and resist decomposition powerfully, are of a deep black colour, and contain large crystals of olivine, and small kernels of calcedony. The first of these minerals is not found in the soft external coats, yet it is so closely united with the substance of the rock as not to admit of a doubt of its being of contemporaneous formation, and not, as supposed by Berzelius}, a fragment of a pre-existing stone enveloped in the liquid matter. Small, but very characteristic specimens of calcedony are of more frequent occurrence in the softer portions of the rock, especially between the concentric nodules; but they are intimately mixed with their substance. It is remarkable, that I detected no calcareous minerals in similar situations in these hills, although the rock is so impregnated with lime as to have led to an extensive deposit of calc-tuff (Kunkur), at present forming along its base, and projecting sometimes half a foot from between the partings of the basaltic tables.—“ The presence of olivine, the soft wacke in which the globular basalt is imbedded, the less crystalline structure, the passage into a porous amygdaloid, containing calcedonies, zeolites, &c., and the granite in the neighbourhood of all the smaller masses differing little from that at a distance,” may perhaps be sufficient to distinguish these insulated basaltic hills from the greenstone.
   On approaching the Godavery, the granite in some degree changes its appearance, containing large and beautiful crystals of red felspar, occasionally imbedded in veins of transparent quartz, clouded with spots and wavy lines of a turbid milky colour. Greenstone dikes are there more common. The river flows over granite, which is intersected by several dikes of greenstone, running more in a north and south direction than those above referred to, and having many minute white crystals diffused through their substance. The dikes project from 8 to 10 feet above the granite, and are divided into rhomboidal masses by fissures, in which lime is deposited. The bed of the river is covered by numerous fragments of calcedonies, zeolites, and other minerals found in volcanic rocks ; and they have been cemented into a more or less solid calcareous conglomerate. The banks are composed of a black basaltic soil, from the lower part of which, where it rests on the granite, as well as from the divisions between the several layers of alluvium, thin slabs of a clayey calc-tuff (Kunkur) project, and are connected above with portions formed round the roots of plants, and below with other layers spread out between the different strata of alluvial earth f. These appearances sufficiently indicate the neighbourhood of the basaltic range of mountains, distinguished in Arrowsmith’s large map as the Sichel or Shesha hills, but which are locally known by the name of the Nirmul range, from the large town situated six miles from the difficult pass leading up the steep escarpment presented by their southern face. None of the stratified primary rocks are seen at the foot of these hills in the line of the section ; but twenty miles to the east of Nirmul, and a few miles south of the mountains, hornblende slate occurs, resting on granite and quartz rock.
  Iron Ore, Mines, and Manufacture of the Steel.—The magnetic iron ore, employed for ages in the manufacture of the Damask steel used by the Persians for sword-blades, is obtained from this schist. The mines I examined, are those of Deemdoortee, but the ore is extensively distributed. The minute grains or scales of iron are diffused in a sandstone-looking gneiss or micaceous schist, passing by insensible degrees into hornblende slate, and sometimes containing amorphous masses of quartz. The strata are much broken up and elevated, so that the dip and direction are in no two places the same, and bear no relation to the mountains to the north.
    Manufacture, $c.—The mines are mere holes dug through the thin granitic soil, and the ore is detached without difficulty by small iron crow-bars. It is then collected and broken on projecting masses of granite or quartz by means of a conical-shaped fragment of compact greenstone; but when too hard to yield to this simple instrument, it is previously roasted. The sand thus procured is washed in shelving depressions dug near a tank, and the heavier parts, separated by this process, are exactly similar to Voysey’s specimens of the iron-sand used in the manufacture of Damascus steel at Kona-Sumoondrum, in the same neighbourhood ; but from his published papers, it does not appear that he had seen the rock from which they were derived. In other respects, all the information I could procure, accurately corresponds with that given in his interesting paper*. The ore is then smelted with charcoal in small furnaces, which have often been described. I did not see any flux used; but, although I watched the whole process, from the digging of the ore till it was formed into bars, I will not assert that none was employed. The iron has the remarkable property of being obtained at once in a perfectly tough and malleable state, requiring none of the complicated processes to which English iron must be subjected, previous to its being brought into that state. Mr. Wilkinson, who has investigated the history of Indian steels with much scientific and practical skill, did me the favour to submit to experiment a specimen of this iron as it came from the furnace. He found it to be extremely good and tough, and considered it superior to any English iron, and even to the best descriptions of Swedish. The Persian merchants, who frequent the iron-furnaces of Kona-Sumoondrum, are aware of the superiority of this iron, and informed Dr. Voysey, that in Persia they had in vain endeavoured to imrfate the steel formed from it; a failure which could be ascribed only to the difference of the materials used, as the whole process of the conversion into steel was conducted under their own superintendence. It is also probable, that there are few places in India where an ore of equal value is so easily procured ; otherwise its distant inland situation, in a difficult and unsettled country, would not have retained a reputation for so many ages. In the manufacture of the best steel three-fifths of this iron is used ; the other two-fifths being obtained from the Indoor district, where the ore appears to be a peroxide. It is evident, that if the beautiful water of the Damascus blades is derived from the crystallization of the steel, the use of two very different varieties of iron, one of which has been ascertained to be of such admirable quality, must have an important influence on the appearance and quality of the manufacture.
   As these mines afford a boundless supply of ore easily wrought, and are situated in the neighbourhood of vast forests, and near a river navigable for boats during part of the year, it is probable, that at no distant period, when the native government has undergone some amelioration, iron may become an important article of commerce. On this account, and because, although much has been written regarding Indian steel, nothing has yet been brought prominently forward regarding the finer kinds of iron ore with which that country abounds, I will make a few additional observations regarding them.
   Dr. Heyne has accurately described the manufacture of iron in the Carnatic, to the south of the Pennar river, and he states that it is, when first smelted, extremely brittle, requiring several operations to bring it into a malleable state. I possess specimens of two varieties of ore used in the district in which he observed the processes, and where I have myself seen them carried on. The one, an iron sand, collected in the beds of rivers, consists of the protoxide, mixed with much of the peroxide; the other, a red schist, is almost entirely composed of red oxide, but in the centre of the mass it affects the magnet. Not far from where this rock occurs, I collected specimens of hornblende schist, leaving little doubt as to the ores being of the same nature, the former having become altered in situ, in the same manner as some of the superficial strata at Deemdoortee are seen to do. I therefore conclude, that the superior quality of the Nirmul iron depends on the ore being a comparatively pure protoxide. It certainly is not dependent on the nature of the fuel, which is much the same in both places. Captain Herbert, indeed, long ago suggested, that the superiority of the Gwalior iron over that principally worked in the Himalayahs, depended on the former being a magnetic ore, like that of Sweden; but the first accurate information on the subject was communicated by Dr. Royle to Mr. De La Beche, who states f, on the authority of that gentleman, that magnetic iron ore is extensively diffused in hornblende slate in the central range of mountains in India, and that it also occurs in the Himalayahs. This geological position corresponds with that of the Nirmul ore; but the latter does not bear any resemblance, except in its peculiar lustre, to the Menaccanite of Cornwall, to which it is compared by Mr. De La Beche; nor could I detect any titanium in it. With regard to the geological relations of the magnetic iron ore, it is also necessary to observe, that in India it is not confined to the hornblende schist, but is found extensively distributed in the granite and gneiss of the Carnatic and Mysore, in quartz rock near the iron works of Porto Novo ; and, as has already been observed, associated with galena in the diamond sandstone of Cuddapah. The discovery of a mineral, so generally confined to the primary rocks, in the great sandstone formation, affords an additional argument in favour of the opinion of those, who consider this rock and the subjacent schists, as equivalents to the older European sedimentary formations, rather than to those of the supermedial order.

   Returning to the line of route, the granite, on approaching to the Sichel hills, becomes softer and decomposes rapidly; and the soil gradually changes to the well-known black basaltic mould, known in India by the name of “cotton ground,” and, as usual, it is mixed with calcedonies, zeolites, &c. Amongst these minerals were some fragments of a red colour, and considerable specific gravity, though full of irregular cavities, and so like the slag of an iron furnace, that I considered them to have had that origin, till I discovered a considerable mass of a similar nature protruding from the granite and black soil by which it was covered. Along with these fragments were others of a semivitri- fied matter, containing small white crystals of felspar, and hardly to be distinguished from a piece of granite fused by Dr. Voysey in the steel furnaces of the neighbouring district. The granite constitutes the surface rock a little further, gradually passing into a black compact basalt, intermixed with many white spots, apparently of felspar. The trap then becomes softer, forming small hills of a cellular amygdaloid, abounding in cavities lined with green earth, and many of them filled with calcedonies, zeolites, quartz crystals, and, more rarely, calcareous spar, of the same kind as those, so remarkable for their beauty, in the portion of this formation described by Colonel Sykes (Geological Transactions, vol. 4., p.422). The crystals also occur in seams, orare diffused through the trap ; and in both cases are intimately mixed with its substance. In the bed of a torrent between two of these hillocks, I met with some soft, clayey, schistose fragments, and others of a siliceous character, and of a black bituminous appearance in the centre, containing very perfect specimens of the Palndina Deccanensis (P1.XLV1J. fig. 20,) and fragments of other shells to be hereafter described. Those which I examined were converted into calcedony. A laborious research on the hill failed to discover them in situ; but about half-way up the escarpment of the principal mountain, which is very steep, and composed of concentric nodular basalt, imbedded in a soft greenish wacke, a narrow band of a singular quartz rock projected about two feet from the surface. It was remarkably scabrous, of various shades of white and red, and had cavities on its surface covered with fine silky crystals. It had every appearance of having been forced into its present situation, when the basalt covered and partially melted the bed to which it belonged. Many fragments of this rock were found below with the shells; and it was again met with, together with the same and other fossils imbedded in basalt, near Hutnoor. The specific gravity of this rock is 2*473, and some of the specimens effervesced feebly in acids, a portion of lime being dissolved ; circumstances in which it corresponds with a similar formation found by Voysey, associated with shells, probably of the same kind, at Medcondah (south of the Godavery), an insulated basaltic hill resting on granite, to which I shall have occasion again to refer. The highest summit of the hills, above the locality of the fossils, is conical, but it is capped by a perfectly horizontal stratified rock, the nature of which I could not determine. It is most probably tabular basalt, although that rock is seldom found in similar situations.
  Such are the appearances presented on ascending the difficult pass leading up the steep escarpment of the Sichel hills, which form the southern boundary of the eastern portion of the great trap formation of Central India. The hills extend from the junction of the Wurdah and Godavery rivers (the basins of which they separate), till they are lost in the gradual rise of the country to the west, nearLonar (lat.20°, Iong.76°,30r), in the province of Aurungabad. Their direction is W.N.W., and, as far as can at present be inferred, they seem to be continuous to the east with numerous ranges of basaltic, sandstone, and granitic hills, extending to the Eastern Ghats, at the lower parts of the course of the Godavery. The extreme breadth of the range, from the foot of the Nirmul pass to the town of Yedlabad, (nearly on a level with the plain country of Berar,) is about 40 miles ; but several smaller hills having for the greater part the same direction, are intimately connected with them to the north, as far as the Wurdah river, which has an elevation of little more than 600 feet above the sea. The Sichel hills are arranged in terraces, with steep sides having projecting spurs, and their summits rise occasionally into conical elevations with rounded or flat tops. They inclose narrow valleys abounding in streams, or support table-lands covered with black soil strewed with trap boulders, and having water everywhere near the surface. A thick wood and grass jungle, composed of very different plants from those common on the granite hills, cover the whole tract, with the exception of the flat summits and some of the terraces, and render it unhealthy for the greater part of the year. The basalt of which they are composed, is generally globular, the spheroids being sometimes of great size; but in many of the water-courses, even of the elevated table-lands, it has a stratified appearance. Small basaltic columns are also met with on the crests of some of the spurs and higher ridges; and where they occur, no fossils and few minerals are found. Granite not only forms the base of the hills at Nirinul to the south, and Yedlabad to the north, but part of the mountains themselves, the basalt being seen to rest on decomposing granite about the centre of the range, in a deep ravine, through which the Koorm river passes; it also again appears high in the table-land to the north of that river, and in one of the terraces of the northern descent, where the most extensive fossil beds were found. Further detail is unnecessary, as Dr. Yoysey’s admirable description of theGawilghur mountains,forming the northern boundary of the great and fertile valley of Berar, as these hills do its southern limits, applies equally well to both ranges.
     The fossils were first discovered in situ, near Munoor, in the basaltic table-land north of the Koorm river; and were subsequently found in the descent of the hills towards Hutnoor, and in different parts of theMucklegnudy pass,leading into the Berar valley. They consist of numerous gyro- gonites ; two species of Cypris ; two, or perhaps three, species of Unio ; and many individuals referable to the genera Paludina, Physa, and Limnea. (PI. XLVII.) The rock in which they occur, varies in different places. Some of the finest specimens were procured from a red chert with scabrous surface, having silicified shells distributed throughout its substance, or projecting from its surface. The chert is deeply imbedded in the nodular basalt, from which it projects in some places several feet. The finest specimens of Unio occur in a beautiful gray chert, imbedded in the basalt, or resting immediately on it, the under surface being plain and smooth, while the upper is rough, from portions of the large shells which project from it. On breaking up one of these masses, it was found to contain entire Unios, many of them having the valves connected and closed, or partially open ; the interior being filled with the same chert, spotted with fragments of shells, minute univalves, and fine specimens of the two species of Cypris, which occur so abundantly. Some parts of the rock exhibit a mixture of sand, clay, and fragments of shells, of very moderate hardness; but the greater portion consists of chert, the materials of which are occasionally arranged in a beautiful, light blue, enamel-like substance, around irregular cavities containing crystals of purple quartz. Some portions also exhibit a minute vesicular structure ; and the whole appearance of this beautiful rock forcibly impresses the mind with the conviction, that it owes its present appearance to the action of the great basaltic eruption, which has enveloped it and the organic remains. The greater number of the shells are converted into chert, but a few retain their original structure ; and in some instances the calcareous matter has been converted into crystals of calcareous spar. Many internal casts of entire shells are found in the substance of the rock, to which they are united at a few points only, a greater or less space being left unoccupied; in others, the entire shell is converted into siliceous matter, retaining the appearance even of the ligaments unaltered ; and fortunately, in a few cases, the hinge and teeth are excellently preserved.
     Numerous fragments of shelly rock, differing much in appearance, lay scattered about over the table-land ; consisting partly of a fine blood-red chert, like that above described, and con- taming the same shells. The gray chert was more sparingly distributed, and the Unios did not occur in the other fragments. Some of them, composed of a tough white clayey stone, so soft as to soil the fingers, contained Physae, Paludinae, and Limneae, mostly converted into calce- dony, but others also retained their original structure, and effervesced with acids. Portions of charred vegetable matter, resembling small fragments of grasses and reeds, occurred in these and the harder cherts. Other specimens are composed of a greenish blue crystalline mass, resembling an ore of copper, (but it is of low specific gravity, and contains no trace of that metal,) and the shells contained in them are converted into the most beautiful crystalline quartz, retaining the form of every convolution of the Physae and Paludinae. The cells of this stone are often coated with fine silky crystals. Masses of a hard coarse chert, consist almost entirely of Gyrogo- nites, but contain many of the same Physae and Paludinae. This rock appears to have formed beds of about half a foot in thickness ; but it was not discovered in situ. A stratified rock was however found in the neighbourhood, resembling some specimens of the argillaceous limestone of the diamond districts, but consisting of a compact whitish chert, which contained Paludinae, and the finest specimens of Gyrogonites. (Plate XLVI1., fig. 1.) Night prevented the connexions of this rock from being determined: the strata were, however, ascertained to be of considerable extent, and to be much buried in the soil; there were also numerous fragments of siliceous rock, partly converted into a black bituminous flint, or a coarse quartzose rock, partially altered into calce- dony, by which most of the shells were also replaced.
     The masses of red chert protruding from the basalt contained, besides the Testacea, small portions of silicified wood, and what I consider to be the fragment of a bone, and of the tooth of a mammiferous animal. The specimens, however, are too imperfect to admit of any certainty as to what they really are; but it is not unlikely that such remains should occur, and I therefore do not suppress what may lead to a more successful inquiry.
  On descending towards Hutnoor, granite, presenting a concentric, ligni- form surface, from the unequal decomposition of the quartz and felspar, occurs at a short distance from the fossils. With this exception, the basalt continues of the same character as before, and fragments of red or deep black chert, containing Paludinm, are found in the beds of torrents; and at Hutnoor they occur in the trap. There is much calcareous matter mixed with the soil, or collected in nodules, and it appears to be derived from the lime contained in the basalt, or between its laminae. On the pioneers attached to our camp penetrating, at Elchoda, through some strata of tabular basalt to obtain water for the troops, seams of a pure white, pulverulent lime were found between the layersf. At Hutnoor fragments of a compact blue limestone, not to be distinguished from that of the diamond districts, were collected; and the rock to which they belonged, was found in the descent from the first of the three principal terraces by which the road leads to the northern base of the hills. The strata were much inclined and broken, but the forest was so thick, that I could not trace them for any distance. After descending to the second terrace, the surface rock suddenly changes to a white, horizontally-stratified limestone, almost entirely composed of large bivalve shells, the edges of which decomposing more slowly than the cement, the natives have applied to it a name signifying impressions made in clay by the feet of sheep. The thickness of the bed in one place, where it is intersected by a torrent, is 12 feet, and it rests directly on red granite. A great spur, from the upper part of the mountain, extends across the terrace, rising precipitously above the fossiliferous limestone, a few hundred yards from the spot where it rests on granite; and has buried the continuation of the stratum under an accumulation of basaltic debris. Where the limestone becomes concealed in the basalt, a friable, gray, cellular mass, resembling ashes, occurs, apparently imbedded in both these rocks. The fossils are composed of granular limestone, the matrix consisting of calcareous matter mixed with the ash-like substance, and small fragments of granite. Some of the shells are of great size, but they are ill preserved, and I found only one specimen with the valves united. These shells, I erroneously considered to be marine (principally from the appearance of those represented in Plate XLV1I., fig. 4 to 8, and some of the large flattened specimens). Mr. Lonsdale, however, who had the kindness to examine some of them, considered their general character to be that of freshwater species. I had previously detected, in a fragment of a compact argillo-calcareous stone found at the bottom of the little cliff where the granite is seen to underlie the fossils, a number of very perfect Melanias; I therefore re-examined the different specimens, and detected in them fragments of the same kind as those in the limestone; and Mr. Sowerby has since been able to extract from the latter, specimens sufficiently distinct to be identified with the Unio Deccanensis (PI. XLVII., fig. 4 to 10,) found in the chert at Munnoor, and another species (Unio? tumida, fig. 11 and 12,) not yet discovered elsewhere. No other fossils were found in this locality.
  When it is considered, that the accumulation of freshwater shells occurs on the precipitous descent of a mountain range, ascended with much difficulty by travellers, it will be evident that the aspect of the country has been entirely altered since these animals lived.
  Towards the foot of the pass, the rock changes from the nodular basalt to amygdaloid; and near its junction with the granite, masses of greenstone porphyry, with large crystals of felspar, occur. The granite then reappears, protruding in rounded masses through the soil of the level country around Yedlabad. The bed of a stream near that town is strewed with fragments of blue limestone and schist, resembling those of the basins of the Pennar and Kistnah ; and higher up the stream, a fine white quartzose sandstone, having a few imbedded fragments of quartz, is found in situ. It dips at a slight angle to the south-west. The surrounding country is covered by a deep basaltic soil, so that the rock on which it rests could not be discovered ; but the argillaceous limestone, passing, in its upper strata, into a greenish or red schist, is traversed by a stream a few miles to the north. Short ranges of trap hills, some of them at nearly right angles to the Sichel mountains, occur to the north-east; and beyond them, an extensive tract of sandstone has been traced for a great distance along the Wurdah.
  At Zynad, argillaceous limestone appears on the surface for several miles, and agrees in every particular with the compact marbles of the diamond districts of the Pennar and Kistnah. The strata sometimes dip at an angle of 40 degrees, but they are in general nearly horizontal, the edges of the layers being disposed in steps on the slopes of gently-rising grounds. Rock crystal and calcareous spar are distributed in thin seams between the strata, as well as through the substance of the rock ; and along the vertical partings of the strata, there are rows of circular cavities, which are generally empty, but are sometimes filled with calcareous concretions. In a few instances, these hollows occur out of the line of fissure, and entirely penetrate the stratum, being connected below with horizontal channels of the same kind. On the surface, calc-tuff (Kunkur) is very abundant, often adhering to the strata, or investing fragments of the rock.
     The same appearances are seen near the diamond mines of Chinoor on the Pennar, where the strata are much disturbed, and basaltic pebbles cover the banks. The only explanation which can be offered of the phenomena in both those distant localities is, that the extrication of gaseous fluids and water from below, had taken place in the lines of fissure, and had dissolved a portion of the limestone, which was again deposited in the great accumulation of tuff and conglomerate so remarkable in these places. That they at all indicate the “ argillaceous limestone” to be of freshwater origin, could never be imagined by any who had seen the rock in question, which, wherever it occurs in the south of India, is entirely devoid of fossils*. This supposition is confirmed by the phenomena exhibited at the hot-springs of Urjunah, which rise in the same rock, and where bubbles of carbonic acid are extricated through round holes in the mud covering the bottom of the rivulet, the water of which, being loaded with lime, a calcareous tuff is rapidly deposited.
  A gentle elevation, extending three miles to the east of the village of Zynad, is composed of this limestone, and it rises very gradually towards a small conical summit, composed of coarse vesicular basalt, which has broken through and covered the limestone. A portion of this rock appears to have been displaced in a singular manner. A wall of perfectly vertical stratification, about 3 feet thick, projects nearly as much from the general surface, and consists internally of the same limestone, as that which it appears to cut at right angles, while externally it is singularly irregular and altered, being converted into a beautifully crystalline limestone, with quartz minerals.
  To the north of this place, as far as thePayn e-Gunga river, the country is flat, covered with basaltic soil or rock connected with insulated trap hills, and intermixed with jaspers, resembling those so common near Bangnapilly, and perhaps derived from the argillo-calcareous schists occasionally seen in the watercourses. The pebbles of the Payne-Gunga consist mostly of calcedonies of a reddish colour, and of argillaceous limestone, and they are in many places consolidated into a conglomerate by the calcareous matter with which all the waters of the district abound. In a layer of this conglomerate, projecting from the alluvial soil of which the bank is composed, numerous recent shells are imbedded. The limestone, and its incumbent schists, are seen north of the river, and they abound in springs and streams loaded with lime, which is deposited as calcareous tuff in the water-courses. Masses of the same substance, several feet in height, project from fissures in the rock, or compose conical eminences of white “ Kunkur,” which are scattered over the black jjasaltic plains.
   Proceeding a little further towards the Pindee hills, in which the principal of these streams takes its rise, sandstone appears on the south bank of a ravine; and on the opposite side, at a lower level, the “argillaceous limestone” so often mentioned, has been raised by some violent forces into irregular gothic arches, overlaid by partially broken but horizontal strata. The spaces within the arches are filled with fragments of the same rock forced from below. Hot springs, having a temperature of 87°, rise through the limestone, and globules of gas escape from round holes in the debris and mud covering the bottom of the ravine. On endeavouring to collect a quantity of the gas, there were found to be considerable and irregular intervals between each jet of air. A recent calcareous sandstone is formed in the bed of the stream, by the debris derived from the quartzose sandstone of the southern bank being agglutinated by the carbonate of lime of the springs.
   A range of low hills having rounded summits, with conical elevations projecting from their sides, runs in a north-west direction, three quarters of a mile from the hot springs. The cap of these hills, where the Pindee Ghat passes over them, consists of the argillaceous limestone, and the large slabs of which it is composed, are fissured in various directions, slightly convex upwards ; and when taken in the mass, they have an anticlinal dip. On the summit, the strata are horizontal and in several places are remarkably altered, the argillaceous and siliceous ingredients having arranged themselves into a black chert, and a mixture of calcareous matter with streaks of a white or pale blue enamel resembling calcedony. The central parts of these bands are composed of minute quartz crystals ; and irregular drusy cavities, coated with amethystine quartz, occur in the blackened flinty portions. There cannot be a clearer indication of the action of heat on a rock of a mixed character than this, even when seen in hand specimens. The whole of the base of the hill is composed of the usual black concentric basalt, the nuclei of which are exceedingly hard and contain much olivine ; and to its intrusion the alteration of the limestone, with its separation from the strata below, is, without donbt, to be ascribed.
   Many hills composed of concentric basalt are scattered over the neighbouring country, in insulated masses or long ranges rising in terraces, and having flattened summits. The sides of the hills between the terraces are steep, and their outline is well defined ; the rock also is black and devoid of vegetation. The terraces occur at very different levels in different hills, rising from the same plain ; and their whole appearance indicates that their remarkable form is due to the circumstances which attended their elevation; and that they have not been subjected to any extensive denudation.
  About five miles north of the hot springs of Urjunah and four miles south of those of Kair, sandstone caps a gently rising ground, covered with basaltic soil. Near the last-mentioned town, many hot springs rise in the argillaceous limestone, which has been remarkably broken up and altered by the globular basalt protruding through it in different places, in masses several of which are only a few yards in circumference. The limestone is, for the most part, nearly horizonal, but it is occasionally more or less inclined, and, as is usual with this formation, it has no regular direction or line of bearing. In a deep well near the village, the water of which is of the usual temperature, the limestone is unaltered ; but above the principal hot spring, some of the most remarkable effects of igneous action in changing a stratified rock, are exhibited. The principal part of the small hill is a whitish limestone, the stratification of which is obliterated, and the rock projects in irregular masses full of cavities passing deep into the mass of limestone, which is partly crystalline, and in many places mixed or coated with jasper and quartz crystals. Much calcareous tuff is associated with these altered rocks, and it fills up many of the cavities ; it is also found in the divisions of the nodular basalt, and masses of it, scattered over the surrounding country, are the only remains of springs which have been long closed up. Some portions of the rock had the appearance, on the surface, of a semifused brick, and had assumed something of a regular arrangement, while the centre was composed of the limestone little altered. Large masses of porous scoria also lay about.
     The principal springs issue at the foot of the rising ground, where the rock is most remarkably altered. Their temperature (87°) was the same as that of Urjunah, on the other side of the Pindee hills, and it did not vary during the hot and cold months of 1831 and 1833. The water of this and many other springs is said to be equally copious at all seasons, covering the neighbouring country with the richest vegetation, when all beyond is a black and parched waste. On issuing from the rock, the water is sensibly acid, and in one spring, carbonic gas escapes with the water. It is remarkably agreeable to the taste, and sparkles in the glass, as well as where the stream passes over rapids. It contains a little muriate of soda, a minute quantity of sulphates, and much carbonate of lime in solution, which is deposited on boiling, and in the bed of the rivulet, where it has formed considerable masses of rock chiefly composed of the petrified vegetation of the banks. So quickly is this deposit formed near some little falls, that shells appear to be imprisoned and entombed while adhering to the face of the rock ; and tufts of grass are encrusted with sediment while their roots are still alive. If any doubt remained as to the nature of the nodular limestone, known in India by the name of “ Kunkur,” it would be removed by the sight here exhibited of all gradations of this substance actually forming, and varying from pulverulent lime to a crystalline rock. The water is probably derived from a great depth, the springs having, as already stated, the same temperature as those of Urjunah, and not being materially diminished by the failure of the annual rains.
  Sandstone forms the surface rock in different directions over the surrounding country, but I had an opportunity of examining it carefully only at Won, eight miles north of Kair, its junction with the limestone being concealed by basaltic soil, mixed with calcedonies, fragments of that rock, schist, and of a coarse puddingstone, which I did not find in situ. The hill of Won is composed of sandstone, dipping in all directions from the apex, and varying in colour from white to red and yellow. It contains also ferruginous grains or scales, either in seams or disseminated through its substance. In a fragment of this kind much resembling the cement of the Bangnapilly diamond breccia, a fossil was discovered having a compact structure and deep black colour, and it is probably a portion of a hollow, compressed vegetable, the centre of which is filled with the sandstone. It is the only instance that has come to my knowledge of a fossil being found in the sandstone of southern India; and as the rock corresponds in geological position and mineralogical characters with the diamond sandstone, the fact is of considerable interest, even if the formations were not found to be continuous, as will be stated hereafter. The specimen is deposited in the Museum of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.
  Sandstone, argillaceous limestone, and schist constitute the building-stones of the surrounding country, which is much buried under basalt, and a black alluvial soil containing calcedonies, jaspers, &c. A few miles south of Chick- nee*, (where the fossils were again met with,) the red schist found above the limestone south of the Urjunah hot-springs and in various places of the diamond districts of the south, reappears, intermixed with protruding masses of basalt, which have altered it in the most singular manner,—the lime of which it is in part composed, being converted into a fine crystalline mineral, in which the red clay is enveloped or diffused, giving the rock and even hand specimens a very striking appearance. Near Chicknee, the schist rises slightly towards a basaltic ridge, in which the fossiliferous chert is likewise imbedded. The schist is divided into minute rhombs by vertical partings, in which veins of calcareous spar from an eighth to half an inch thick have been formed, and give it a beautiful, reticulated appearance. Lime is found in the schist, and portions of the red clay are enveloped in the crystalline limestone, which contains no magnesia.
     The fossils occur on the surface, or are imbedded in nodular basalt over several miles, being found in blocks of indurated clay, chert, and flinty slate. The appearance of the indurated clay is the same as in some of the specimens from the Sichel Hills, but the clay is harder, full of cavities, and in some cases passes into perfect chert, or has waved lines of quartz or opalized matter diffused through the substance of the mass. Many Physae, Paludinae, and a few Limneae of the same species as those already noticed, are found in this indurated clay or imperfect chert. Some of them are entirely converted into calcedony ; others have the lime replaced by quartz, which is finely crystallized and covers the surface of the convolutions; or the columella only is preserved, passing across an empty cast of the shell. In some cases, however, the structure of the fossil is unaltered, and it effervesces in acids. Flinty slate without organic remains occurs in the neighbourhood of those amorphous masses, and many fragments of the same kind containing large compressed bivalves are scattered about. In one block of this kind, portions of palm wood mineralized by black flint, intersected by fine veins of a light blue opal, (of the same kind as occurs in some of the specimens of fossil wood from Antigua, lately presented to the Society by Mr. Stokes,) was found associated with compressed very thick bivalve shells, probably referable to the same species as those of Munnoor.
  Every appearance presented by these rocks indicates the action of the semifluid basalt on the beds of mud and sand, probably derived from the neighbouring sandstones and schists, in which the shells previously existed.
  At Hingan-ghat*, a few miles further to the north, considerable fragments of silicified palms and other plants were found in a black chert lying on the basalt, and similar masses, but without fossils, were imbedded in it. I met with no organic remains to the north of this town, the whole country as far as the city of Nagpoor being covered with a rich black soil, from which insulated basaltic hills with flattened summits rise abruptly.
  Of these hills the most remarkable is that of Seetabuldee, which is based on decomposing gneiss and mica slate. To Dr. Voysey’s descriptionf I have nothing to add ; but as it has been inferred J, that the “ flattened summits and long flat outline” of the low ranges connected with this celebrated hill, and forming the eastern part of the great trap district, are composed of basalt 
having the same stratified appearance as that of other parts of the formation, it is necessary to mention, that they are formed of globular basalt such as has been already described, or of basaltic columns of very regular forms, which diverge from the centre of the hill and incline outwards at an angle of 45° with the horizon, or form a figured pavement on the flat summits.
Origin of Minerals in Trap Rocks.
     The lower part of the hill of Seetabuldee itself exhibits a tendency to columnar structure, caused by horizontal and vertical partings, the sides of which are coated with thin plates of calcedony, and, according to Capt. Jenkins *, of calc spar. These minerals are not confounded with the substance of the basalt, and may be the result of infiltration or sublimation of siliceous and calcareous matters. In no other situation did I meet with an example in which either of these processes would account for the occurrence of the calcedonies, zeolites, calc-spar, &c. found in the amygdaloids and nodular basalt of India. Almost everywhere, calcareous spar is more rare than siliceous minerals, which would not be the case were they derived from infiltration, if we are to interpret the past by the present operations of nature. Wherever I have met with the basalt, and in the neighbourhood of every greenstone dike or insulated mass of that rock, and under every layer of basaltic soil in India, calcareous matter is deposited, and has even occasionally a crystalline structure. In the escarpments of the Mysore ghats, veins of basalt, not two inches thick, ramify through the granite, and are coated with a compact layer of carbonate of lime. Voysey found the granite in the neighbourhood of the basalt intermixed with calcareous matter, indications of which I have myself seen, in the deposit of tuff on the summit of granitic logging-stones near greenstone. If, then, we suppose infiltration to have deposited the calcedonies, agates, &c., &c., when chemical action is presumed to have been more powerful than at present, a greater number of the cavities would have been filled with lime than with such intractable substances, which is not the case. These are also frequently intermixed with the basalt in a manner which could have been produced only by their being formed simultaneously. I have seen masses of calcedony, passing into a black mineral not to be distinguished from the surrounding basalt. They also occur in the compact nodules where no fluid could have had access, and even in the cavities of the Seetabuldee basalt, lined by an impervious glassy coat. In this rock, likewise, calc spar occurs, penetrated by needle-like crystals of the same substance, invested with a crust of the basalt and connected with each side of the cavity, and resembling chiastolite in structure. It is indeed impossible to conceive how many of the appearances presented by the agates, cornelians, or drusy cavities in calcedony, partially or entirely filled by quartz crystals, or a central mass of calc spar, could be formed in the way supposed, as the first coating of silex would effectually close out the further access of the aqueous solution of that substance ; nor Could layers so formed, separate into distinct cavities, having both sides covered with quartz crystals, as they are sometimes seen to do. It is, however, only by a careful study of the rocks themselves, that this can be fully understood. I have selected a few specimens to show that the majority, if not all the minerals of the Indian trap rocks, are not formed by infiltration. One of these, perhaps, deserves particular notice ; it is a mass of calcedony, 8 or 10 inches in length and 6 or 8 in diameter, of a conical shape, and was found imbedded with its apex downwards between the globular basalt, and impressed with the irregularities of its surface. In another of these specimens the upper part is perfectly flat and smooth, without any impressions of the basalt, and is composed of a thick covering of cacho- long, parallel stripes of which appear to indicate the slow cooling of the surface. The centre of the mass is composed of quartz crystals, radiating to the centre, which is occupied by calcareous spar impressing or impressed by the quartz. The mode of its occurrence increases the conviction in my mind, that the only correct theory of the formation of such minerals in trap rocks, is the play of the molecular attractions existing between similar particles of matter. That so eminent an inquirer as Dr. Turner should have asserted that all calcedonies, rock crystals, &c., even when occurring in volcanic rocks, are the result of aqueous infiltration, I can only account for, by the difficulty of explaining how carbonic acid is retained at high temperatures, in any other way than by supposing a great pressure to have existed at the time the rock was in an ignited state ; but of the existence of which, proof is often entirely wanting where crystals of carbonate of lime occur. The phenomena exhibited by the vesicular trap, scoriae, and porous chert associated with the Indian basaltic and fossiliferous rocks, satisfied me, that at the time of their formation they were subject to no pressure sufficient to retain the carbonic acid of the altered limestones, and of the shells and calc spar inclosed in the geodes ; but no other explanation presented itself, till I was informed by Mr. Faraday of his beautiful experiment of exposing carbonate of lime in perfectly dry air to the heat of the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe, without driving off its carbonic acid. In the simple apparatus employed by him to show that the retention of the acid depended on the absence of moisture, no pressure of any consequence could be exerted on the lime. Guy Lussac has lately published some experiments on the effect of aqueous vapour in assisting the escape of carbonic acid from limestone, and concludes, that its agency is trifling; but as he does not appear to have taken the precaution of drying the atmospheric air by passing it through sulphuric acid, as was done by Mr. Faraday, they cannot be considered as invalidating the beautiful results obtained by the latter. His observation, however, that the water contained in limestones is driven off before the carbonic acid and at a much lower heat, is important, in showing that the calcareous matter in a rock exposed to volcanic action may lose its water before the carbonic acid, and be thus reduced to the state of the carbonate of lime in Mr. Faraday’s platinum tube. These facts will assist in explaining the anomalies observed in the fossils of the district above referred to, which often retain their carbonic acid when portions of the rock in which they occur have been fused by the inclosing basalt, while other portions are vesicular from the escape of gaseous matters. The whole phenomena, indeed, would admit of explanation by supposing, what must in fact have occurred, the presence or absence of moisture during the various degrees of heat to which the rocks were exposed in the progress of the eruption, and in the course of cooling. A shell, in one part of a rock, may thus retain its carbonic acid, while in another portion it may be reduced to quick lime, subsequently carried off by the water, leaving only a cast; and a third may be replaced by silica, or the form of its convolutions taken by fine quartz crystals, perhaps derived from silica rendered gelatinous by the lime with which it was ignited.
     In stating these views, I venture only to express an opinion forced on me by the phenomena under description, and which appear to explain some of them better than the theory of pressure, which, however useful in removing the prejudices against the igneous origin of the trap rocks, has been injurious in leading geologists to admit too easily the existence of aqueous pressure, or extensive denudations of solid rocks, supposed to have confined the carbonic acid at the time of eruption. No doubt pressure is an efficient agent in some cases, but not in many to which it has been applied.
  The trap terminates in the line of section, a few miles to the north of the city of Nagpoor, and is succeeded by a red sandstone, the strata of which are bent, fractured, and converted into a compact quartz rock, at the point of contact with the granite which has burst through it. Within a few hundred yards of the ravine where these phenomena were observed, mica slate occurs, and a little beyond, some hills of gneiss. A bed of granular limestone is quarried at the foot of a conical hill of basalt, in part composed of a scabrous quartzose, and calcareous rock, abounding in drusy cavities, calcedonies and cornelians. Further north, granite veins pass through a much-elevated limestone, varying in colour from red to gray and black, and the stratification of which is nearly obliterated. The gneiss and mica slate forming the neighbouring hills are also penetrated by dykes and masses of granitef. To the north of this district are 50 miles of a wild mountain country, composed of granitic rocks, with trap in the ascents and tops of the passes ; the basalt then reappears, and composes great part of the valley of the nerbudda.
  In a direction south-west of Nagpoor, the nodular basalt is the only formation met with as far as Baitool (90 miles), where granitic rocks reappear, but are succeeded by fine-grained sandstones with traces of coal, and penetrated by trap dykes ranging from S.E. to N.Wj. Here, the sandstone rises into mountains, and constitutes what appears to be the continuation of the range forming the division between the valleys of the Taptee and Nerbudda rivers ; and “ indurated clay,” containing casts of the same shells as those of the Sichel range, also occurs.
  Before proceeding to notice more particularly the fossils, and the evidence they afford of the geological era of the intrusion of the basalt, it is necessary to make some observations on the Sichel range, and the connexions of the several formations occurring in the district described. The basaltic rocks of Nagpoor and of the country to the south, have been considered by every observer to form the eastern part of the great basaltic formation of Western India, with which it is continuous, and with which it agrees in every particular of general character and mineralogical structure, and in being connected with stratified rocks, which, as far as is yet known, are of the same age. The only difference is, that towards the eastern limits of the formation, the hills are less elevated and the trap breaks through the granite and stratified rocks, while to the west the mountains are, with a few exceptions, entirely composed of basalt from the level of the sea to the loftiest summits.
  Lonar Lake,c.—The Sichel hills, which have heretofore attracted little attention in a geological point of view, terminate to the west in the neighbourhood of Lonar, near what appears to have been a vast crater in the centre of the great basaltic district. As it is the only instance of a volcanic outburst discovered in this immense Plutonic region, a more detailed account of it than has yet been given to the public, may not be unacceptable.
      It is a nearly circular or oval depression, in a country composed of tabular and nodular basalt, and sloping gently towards it on every side. It is between three and four miles in circumference at the upper margin of the precipitous escarpment which rises from the bottom of the valley about 500 feet. The extent from which the water is collected may be about six miles in circumference, but no measurements were made. Two small streams fall into it from above ; one issuing from a pagoda, to which it is carried from the gentle slope behind ; and the other passes over a small cliff, on which it deposits a considerable quantity of stalactite. The sides of the crater are covered with a forest inhabited by tigers and game; and the bottom is occupied by underwood, a few fields, in the irrigation of which the water of the streams is nearly expended, and by a small lake of salt and bitter, greenish water, surrounded by a muddy shore, and varying in size at different seasons. Many sweet springs issue from the saline mud, and a well is built within its highest level, the water of which stands at the same height as that of the lake, though issuing from a depth of nearly twenty-four feet.
      I have carefully examined the water of this well, and that of the small stream at the pagoda above. This last had a specific gravity of 1000‘6 ; and 2000 grains, evaporated at 212°, gave a solid residue of -h of a grain, the greater part of which consisted of muriate of soda with a little sulphate, and the remainder of carbonate of lime. The water of the well below had nearly the same specific gravity, but contained in 2000 grains, one grain of solid matter, of which TT, of a grain were soluble in water, and contained muriate of soda and a little sulphuric acid and lime ; the insoluble part consisted of carbonate of lime. Neither of the waters contained any trace of alkaline carbonates or of magnesia. It is unnecessary to go further into the analysis here, as another bottle of the same water had a higher specific gravity, and contained more lime, a circumstance sufficiently accounted for by the escape of a portion of the carbonic acid from the other specimen. The water of the lake is clear, and has no unpleasant smell; but the mud at its bottom is strongly impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen. In February, 1834, when the specimens were collected, the lake was in no place more than 5 feet in depth of water and mud, but when full it may be eight or ten feet deep in some parts. A layer of salt 2 or 3 inches thick covered the bottom under the mud, and when broken up and removed, was found to be composed of a middle plate, with radiating laminae above, and having a striated appearance below. That obtained by diving and bringing up baskets of the black mud, at a season when there was much more water in the lake. The salt accumulates slowly, and is collected only once in several years, the quantity having diminished in consequence of the mounds erected above the edge of the crater to regulate the supply of water, having been neglected ; but it is evident, from the great beauty of the specimens obtained, that the quality is not affected by this cause. The salt is collected at the end of the dry season, when the water is low ; and I observed mounds of the black mud on the banks, covered with an efflorescence of tabular crystals. The salt is used for washing and dying chintzes, &c., and is exported to considerable distances. I imagined that the water of the lake in which such large quantities of salt were deposited, was saturated ; but 1 found its specific gravity to be only 1027’65, a solution of the salt itself obtained from the bottom at the same time being 1148-4 ; and the water rapidly dissolved the crystals thrown into it. On analysis, the salt was found to consist in 100 parts : of carbonic acid, 38; soda, 40’9 ; water, 20'6 ; insoluble matter, *5, and a trace of a sulphate. This nearly corresponds to the composition of the trona or striated soda from the lakes of Fezzan, examined by Mr. R. Phillips; but approaches somewhat nearer to the equivalent numbers of the sesquicarbonate established by that analysis, which is to be ascribed to the greater purity of the Lonar salt. The water of the lake contained besides, a little potash, muriate of soda 29 grains, sesquicarbonate of soda 4-2 nearly, and sulphate of soda T of a grain in 1000 grains of the water. No lime could be detected in it, nor did I discover any magnesia. These facts confirm Berthollet’s theory of the formation of carbonate of soda in the natron lakes of Egypt, viz. that of a mutual decomposition of the muriate of soda and carbonate of lime when in a pasty state.
   The striated soda of Fezzan and of this lake, containing half an equivalent more of carbonic acid than can be furnished by carbonate of lime, renders some modification of his theory necessary; and the most probable explanation appears to be, that the carbonic acid by which the lime is held in solution in the mud, furnishes the acid, and perhaps indicates the existence of an unstable sesquicarbonate of that substance; which is not improbable from other facts in the history of the union with that acid. This was suggested by my friend Captain Smith of the Madras Engineers, and explains the circumstance sufficiently.
     Like most points in physical science, these observations have other and more extensive applications than that of affording an explanation of the production of natron in this lake. Carbonate of soda is extensively distributed over the surface of the soil in various countries, more especially in the basaltic portion of Central and Western India, and in the limestone districts of the south; the real relations of which have been a subject of discussion amongst Indian geologists, and inferences unsupported by fact have been drawn from it. In all the places where I have met with it, or of which detailed information has been obtained, muriate of soda and carbonate of lime existed in the soil, and the natron was found on the surface of the moist earth or mud. Near Gundycottah on the banks of the Pennar, common salt is interstratified with the upper schistose strata of the argillaceous limestone on which the sandstone rests; and on the surface of the neighbouring soil, natron, contaminated with much muriate of soda, is collected and used in washing and in glassmaking. The salt associated with the limestone, and the water of a saline well dug through it, having the specific gravity of 1002-5, contain common salt and a little sulphate without any carbonate of soda, which is no doubt produced in the same manner as the Lonar salt. I did not ascertain whether it was also a sesquicarbonate, but I have examined a portion of native carbonate of soda from another part of India, with which Mr. Faraday had the kindness to furnish me, and I found it to be composed of a mixture of that salt with muriate of soda and a little sulphate. The same is probably true of the carbonates found in other countries in similar situations!. A specimen, however, procured from the water of a deep well near London, passing through the London clay into the chalk, which I received from Professor Daniel], contained the carbonate; but as the sesquicarbonate is decomposed by a low heat, no inference can be founded on the examination of specimens obtained, as this was, from the boiler of an engine.
     The absence of Lime in the water of the Lonar Lake is a remarkable circumstance, but easily accounted for, as the sesquicarbonate of soda and the water itself precipitate the sulphate and muriate of lime, notwithstanding the mutual decomposition they undergo when in a semifluid state. The Lake of Ourmia, in Persia, is stated by Dr. Marcet to contain no lime, although of a specific gravity of 1000.2, and abounding in sulphates and muriates. This appeared very remarkable
in an inland sea nearly 300 miles in circumference, situated in a volcanic country. On referring to the works of travellers, it appeared that the streams flowing into it abounded in lime, which is deposited in large quantity in the form of a beautiful travertine. The lake is shallow, and at certain seasons much of it is nearly dry ; the water is clear and transparent, but the mud of the bottom is loaded with sulphuretted hydrogen, and thick layers of salt, formed in it under the water, are redissolved on any agitation. No fish can live in it. All these phenomena are exact counterparts of those exhibited at Lonar, but no information is given as to the salt collected from its saline mud, except that Sir John Malcolm states, the salts are bitter and different from those of the sea. I am, therefore, strongly impressed with the conviction, that sesquicarbonate of soda
is formed from its waters as at Lonar, and precipitates the lime. Dr. Marcet, however, has given, in the Philosophical Transactions for 1819, the results of an examination of a small quantity of this water, which he states to be as follows:
1. Precipitate from 500 grains of the water by nitrate of silver	 237‘0
2. By nitrate of baryta	 66*0
3. Magnesian precipitate by carbonate of ammonia and phosphate of soda 	 10'5
and he infers, that although it contains no lime, it yields twenty times as much sulphuric acid and six times as much muriatic acid as sea water does. But Dr. Marcet had only 150 grains of this water to operate on, and merely gives in a tabular form, along with many specimens of sea water, the quantity of precipitate caused by the various reagents ; and there is no evidence that the precipitate from muriate of baryta was not, in part, caused by carbonate of soda. It is, at all events, worthy of the inquiry of future travellers.
   The Lake of Ourmia, like that of Lonar, contains potash, which I did not not detect in the springs running into the latter, but its source is no doubt in the decaying (and when I visited it, burning) trees on the surrounding precipices. The sulphuretted hydrogen adhering to the clay has been supposed to be derived from volcanic sources, but I have observed the same phenomenon
in the salt water inlets along the Indian coast, wherever the bottom contained argillaceous and carbonaceous matter ; and it even goes so far as to form considerable quantities of sulphur and, I have reason to believe, sulphuric acid, although on this point the proof is defective. The effect is to be ascribed to the decomposition of the sulphates of the water by the carbon; and the clay probably only prevents its passing off into the air or mixing with the water, by the power of adhesion. Similar actions have gone on in former times in the alluvium on which the city of Madras stands, and probably in more ancient deposits.
   The ancient crater of Lonar seems never to have been an active eruptive vent, as no scoriae or lava currents can be traced around its margin, which is too distinct and unaltered to admit of any probability of these having been subsequently removed by denudation. A certain degree of forcible elevation was sustained by the margin of the lake, when the explosion or subsidence happened from which the great depression took its origin.
   From Lonar the basaltic district extends to the south as far as Beder; to the west, 200 miles to Bombay ; and northward, to the banks of theNerbudda, near the ancient cities of Indoor and Mhysir, reported to have been buried at a remote period under volcanic eruptions. To the east, the great basaltic country of Berar extends as far as Nagpoor ; and the Sichel range passes in a S.E. by E. direction to the confluence of the Wurdah and Godavery, and towards the eastern ghats. Hot springs and streams loaded with carbonate of lime, occur along the line of elevation of these mountains at Mahoor, Urjunah, Kair, Byorah, and at Badrachellum, a short distance above the pass through which the Godavery reaches the alluvial plains of the coast. The spring of Byorah is surrounded by sandstone and limestone rocks, and carbonic acid escapes with the water, which has a temperature of 110° and holds lime in solution. That of Badrachellum, which rises in the sandy bed of the Godavery, has a temperature of 140°, and contains sulphuretted hydrogen, also sulphates and muriates of soda and lime. A sandstone resembling the cement of the Bangnapilly diamond breccia and the rock of Won, protrudes from the sandy bed of the river near the spring; and granite, basalt, and a red schist resembling that so common in the diamond* districts, occur in the neighbourhood ; diamonds also are occasionally found. Other hot springs are reported to exist in this line of elevation; but that wild and little-known country, far removed from the residence of any European, must long remain in a great measure unexplored.
  The facts stated in the preceding pages prove that the basaltic rocks, by which so much of Western and Central India are covered, are more recent than the sandstone and argillaceous limestone of the basins of the Pennar, Kistnah, Godavery, and of the mountains south of the Ner- budda; and that, notwithstanding the frequent occurrence of these rocks in a horizontal position, they have been subjected to violent operations, which have in many instances elevated the strata and remarkably altered the rocks themselves. It also appears, from observations made on the borders of the trap districts, and in other places where the primary rocks and the sandstones and limestones are not entirely concealed, that the basalt has burst forth from numerous fractures in these formations, probably simultaneously, although often forming insulated masses. It is possible, that more than one period of eruptive violence may have occurred between the era of the formation of the greenstone dykes, so common in the granitic districts, and the conclusion of the eruptions by which the fossils were entombed; but at present there is no proof of such having been the case; and all observers have considered the eruptions to have been contemporaneous ; an opinion, to a certain extent, confirmed by the occurrence of the same fossils in very distant localities.

  The sandstone and argillaceous limestone I have myself traced, from the neighbourhood of Nagpoor nearly to the junction of the Wurdah with the Godavery, bearing the same characters as in the vicinity of the fossil beds; and I have collected specimens of the same rocks at various places between this and Badrachellum and the diamond mines in the neighbourhood of the Kistnah. This tract, for 250 miles, is nearly an uninterrupted forest, and presents many difficulties in the investigation of its geological structure. Trap rocks and basaltic soil occur in many parts of the course of the Go- davery, and granite of the usual character is occasionally met with. Dr. Voysey, who investigated great part of it with his usual accuracy, describes the sandstone as constituting a range of mountains 60 miles in extent, to the north-west of Badrachellum; and the surface rock 20 miles south of Ellore (near the alluvial plains of the Kistnah and the diamond mines), also at Mungapett on the Godavery, where 1 found silicified wood resembling that of Pondicherry. Fossil wood was also seen by Mr. Geddes strewed over the country N.W. of this point, towards the junction with the Wurdah. Where the sandstone of the Godavery meets the granite to the west, Dr. Voysey states that it can hardly be recognised as the same rock, consisting of a conglomerate containing quartz, felspar, and rounded pieces of granite resembling that of the eastern ghats. The argillaceous limestone occurs in the same district, and is more widely distributed than Dr. Voysey supposed. He found it at an elevation of 2600 feet above the sea, and exhibiting marks of great disturbance, dipping to the S.E., and at the summits of the hills intermixed with quartz rockf. Dr. Voysey considers these formations at the lower part of the Godavery, to be the same as those of the Kistnah and Pennar; and in this opinion I fully coincide, although 1 have found the continuity of the sandstone and argillaceous limestone to be interrupted by a narrow band of granite, extending from the delta of the Kistnah to the granitic platform of the Deckan. Some of the hills, however, have caps of sandstone. In the present state of our knowledge, it is difficult to form any correct notion as to the dip and direction of these rocks. Indications of derangement and elevation by the granite are, however, sufficiently apparent.
  Sandstones and schists of the same characters, and associated with the same rocks, are also extensively distributed along the great tributaries of the Kistnah, in the southern Mahratta country, near the western ghats, and a little to the south of the part of the basaltic district described by Colonel Sykes (Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, Vol. IV.). The limits of this part of the formations have been but imperfectly traced. According to Dr. Christie’s observations and my own, they are the same as those of the Cuddapah district*. The occurrence of sandstones and stratified limestones in this situation, is a fact of great importance, which has escaped the notice of those, who have speculated on the period of elevation of the great mountain chains of the peninsula. It was for this reason, that I selected the line of section from Madras to Atchera, on the western coast, within the limits assigned by Colonel Sykes to the basalt, and near to which I discovered the sandstone below the escarpment of the western ghats. (Section 2, Plate XLVI.) In the pagoda of the town, I observed several quartzose sandstone pillars; and I discovered the rock itself forming a small range of hills to the south of the town, and dipping at a considerable angle to the N.W. The stone is similar to that of the hills, near the Chinoor diamond mines. The rock at the entrance of the inlet is laterite, having the appearance of horizontal stratification ; and there are some indications of trap below it; but of this I could not obtain positive evidence. Colonel Sykes, however, states that the basalt occurs a little to the south at Malwan; and I found it at Colter, and other places to the north, underlying the laterite, at the foot and on the escarpments of the hills. These facts are sufficient to show, that the elevation of the western ghats in this part of their course, was posterior to the deposition of the sandstones, which, for the present, must be considered as contemporaneous over all the districts described. I am aware of the uncertain nature of mineralogical characters, as characterizing different formations; but in rocks exhibiting such remarkable appearances and relations over such extensive areas, and when no organic remains exist in them, I do not think it wrong, to place some confidence in the evidence they afford, more particularly in the south of India, where the rapid changes of formations, so common in Europe, are quite unknown.
  The speculations of Elie de Beaumont on the age of these mountains is founded on negative evidence and analogies which appear to me to have little weight; nor can I consider the remarks of Dr. Benza, founded on his excellent researches on the geology of the Neilgherry mountains, as more conclusive. The non-occurrence of stratified rocks and of organic remains in a high granitic table land, affords no proof that these mountains have not been recently elevated; and the plentiful occurrence of ferruginous sandstone, containing brown coal, lignite, and mineral copal, at the foot of the Travan-core mountains, show that these inferences have been too hastily drawn, when such gigantic generalizations were to be established.
   With regard to the age of the diamond sandstone and argillaceous limestones, my own conviction is, that they belong to the more ancient secondary, or even transition rocks; an opinion, which is not at all contradicted by their frequent occurrence in horizontal strata, as they could not have been deposited in the situations in which they are now found. The facts I have stated, will enable others to estimate the correctness of an impression founded on the structure, geological relations, and occasional nearly vertical position of the strata. On this subject, I would express no decided opinion, but recommend an examination of the junction of these formations with the stratified and unstratified primary rocks, with a view to this question.
   The sandstones and limestones of Bundlecund and Malwa correspond in many particulars with those of the south of India, and have been considered by all writers as belonging to the same formations. The sandstone, Major Franklin considers to be the same as the saliferous sandstone of England* ; to which it has been objected, that the salt diffused through the soil of Bundlecund may not be derived from this source, as it has never been discovered in that rock. I have also ascertained that salt occurs in all the formations of India, from granite to recent alluvium. I have, indeed, never met with a saline spring in the sandstone, but this I consider to be accidental, that rock being generally placed in inaccessible situations. I have, however, found thin seams of salt, interstratified with the upper schistose layers of the argillaceous limestone, in the immediate neighbourhood of a cliff of sandstone 300 feet in height, between the lower beds of which a similar schist was interposed. A moreimportantobjection to Major Franklin’s opinion of the diamond sandstones belonging to the new red sandstone is, that in the peninsula, this sandstone, throughout 800 miles of latitude, and half as much of longitude, is superior to the limestone he has called Lias.” Nor can I find sufficient proof in his memoirs, or in other papers on the country between the Nerbudda and the Ganges, that this limestone reposes directly on the sandstone; and it is evident, that no inference can be founded on its occurrence at a higher level in a country so much altered by denudation and the intrusion of eruptive rocks. But should it be hereafter found, that the limestone in certain parts of Bundlecund does actually occupy a higher geological position, the fact would not be conclusive against the diamond sandstones of the north and south, belonging (as every thing indicates) to the same formation. I am indeed of opinion, that the argillaceous limestone and the sandstone constitute only one formation, although I do not think that they should be spoken of as such in the present state of our knowledge. The basalt which has broken up and penetrated these rocks to the north and south of the Nerbudda, is connected with the same system of trap rocks, and was probably erupted at a period much more recent than either of those to which the sandstones and limestones have been referred.
Inferences respecting the Freshwater Fossils.
  On the evidence on this subject afforded by the fossils imbedded in or covered by the basalt, I shall now make a few observations. For the descriptions of the shells, I am indebted to Mr. J. De Carle Sowerby.
  These fossils all belong to freshwater genera, and to species which have not yet been discovered recent. I have not been able to obtain the seeds of Asiatic Charae, nor the valves of any Cypris inhabiting the fresh waters of India. The shells, however, all dilfer from those inhabiting the rivers of the neighbouring country, as far as Mr. Sowerby and myself could judge, by comparing them with a collection of recent shells, which I made during a residence of several years at Nagpoor; nor do I think it possible that any of the larger shells could have escaped my notice, did they still inhabit the northern branches of the Godavery. Colonel Sykes, also, had the kindness to allow me to examine a collection of recent shells made by him near the western ghats, consisting of the same species as those of the Berar valley, and they are of course different from the fossils. I also failed to detect amongst them any of the shells contained in a large collection of recent land and freshwater Testacea from Bengal, presented to the Zoological Society by Mr. Benson. It may therefore be inferred, that the fossils do not belong to recent species.
  Gyrogonites have not yet been observed in any deposit more ancient than the freshwater formations of the basin of Paris. Cyprides occur in the tertiary strata, and in the Weald clay below the chalk, and perhaps in the Birdie- house limestone of the Edinburgh coal-field. Of the other five genera discovered in these fossil beds, two have hitherto been found only recent or in tertiary deposits, viz. Limnea and Physa; and the best characterized specimens of some of the others are referable to the same period. It is therefore extremely probable, that the basalt in which these fossils are imbedded, and which has altered the rocks in which they occur, belongs to the tertiary epoch ; but to which period, I fear we have not the means of forming any decided opinion. Though none of the species are recent, yet they are too few and in too ruinous a state to admit of any general conclusions ; although, from the very great number of individuals collected in various localities, without adding any fresh species, it is probable that nearly the whole which exist have been procured. But when the vast extent of the country occupied by the basalt is considered, and that a still greater tract was broken up or disturbed at the time of its eruption, it will not appear improbable, that a rule, founded on the disappearance of marine shells in districts exposed to no such extensive causes of destruction of animal life, should not apply.
  In the preceding pages, I have described the fossils discovered by Mr. Geddes aud myself in various parts of the Sichel mountains, and the Valley of Berar, extending through the great trap district for 140 miles ; and I shall now shortly refer to other localities at great distances from each other, where the same fossils have been found in similar rocks, buried under the basalt.
     Dr. Spilsbury discovered, eighteen miles from Jubalpoor, in an undulating plain studded with irregular masses of trap, blocks of “indurated clay,” containing casts of fossil shells, for the most part siliceous, and resembling those discovered by Dr. Voysey in the Gawilghur range. At Saugor, nearly 100 miles to the north-west, reversed shells, stated to be exactly the same as those of Jubalpoor, were discovered by Dr. Spry in a bed of limestone, entirely surrounded by an amphitheatre of trap hills, in which a lower range of compact sandstone is included f. This fossil- iferous limestone is covered by 17 feet of basalt, and rests on a coarse siliceous grit, under which basalt is again met with. In the same neighbourhood fine specimens of silicified palms are found. Jubalpoor and Saugor are situated to the north of the Nerbudda, in the great Vindya range ; and in the same district fossil bones of Mammalia occur in limestone capped by basalt. The drawings of the shells differ a little from each other J, but the fossils are stated to be the same ; and, as far as Mr. Sowerby could judge, they do not differ from the Physa Prinsepii. The similarity was more obvious in other specimens left in India, and I have no doubt of their being the same. It is, however, desirable that the specimens themselves, in the Museum of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, should be compared, that the connexion of the northern and southern portions of the trap formation may be placed beyond a doubt. South of the Nerbudda, fossils are again met with in the mountainous country, north of the sources of the Taptee, at a place called Jirpah, near to which trap hills have broken through the sandstone. Dr. Voysey, in speaking of the heat of the steel furnaces of Neermul, notices the occurrence of an “ indurated clay” containing fossils at this place, but he gives no further information regarding them§. In a small specimen of this rock, Mr. Sowerby recognised the Paludina Deccanensis, and a portion of a larger shell, probably the Physa Prinsepii, and the matrix is the same as the fossiliferous “ indurated clay” from Gawilghur; it also much resembles many of the varieties of chert in which the Berar fossils are found. The third range of hills has been described by Dr. Voysey under the name of the Gawilghur Mountains, and it forms a very remarkable feature in the physical geography of Central India. In position, and appearance to the fossiliferous cherts of the Nirmul Hills. Sivalingapah lies considerably to the west, but nearly in the same latitude as Nirmul.
   The only other locality where fossil shells have yet been discovered, within or near the great basaltic district, is five miles south of Rajahmundry, a large town on the Godavery, a little above the alluvial plains of its Delta*. They occur in some small hills ranging nearly W. and E., and composed of conglomerate and red sandstone supporting wacke, overlaid by limestone containing shells, which is again covered by basalt. The shells are in the best condition in the upper part of the limestone; of many only the impressions remain, but the oysters, which are the most abundant, are well preserved. The basalt and some specimens of the chert, jaspers, &c., from these hills, presented to me by Dr. Benza, resemble the varieties found with the freshwater shells of the Sichel range, and the hills in which they occur having the same direction, are probably connected with the eastern termination of that range. They are evidently associated with the sandstones of the diamond districts to the north of the Kistnah, and with the continuation of the eastern ghats ; thus confirming the opinion above expressed, of these mountains being of more modern elevation than is supposed hy some geologists. It is impossible to separate the western ghats from the eastern in any theory that can be formed, as they diverge from the same point, support the same table-lands and the same stratified rocks; and where these mountains meet at the Neilgherry Hills, the hornblende schist has been noticed by Dr. Benza to dip in opposite directions from the eastern and western mountains.
   In the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. iv., p. 565, and Plate XLVIII., fossil shells are figured, which bear considerable resemblance to some specimens of Unio from the Sichel Hills, but not sufficiently to identify them. They form part of the Dadapoor collection of SubHimalayan fossils, so ably investigated by Lieuts. Baker and Durand, and are stated by Mr. Prinsep, in a note, to be identical with specimens collected by Colonel Burney with the bones of the Mastodon, &c. in Ava. He adds, that they probably belong to the large and thick species of Cyrena noticed by Professor Buckland as occurring in a blue and marly clay near the locality of the fossil bones collected by Mr. Crawford (Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. v.); but I found the specimens of these shells in the Society’s collection, to differ both from those of the Sub- Himalayahs and of Central India.
   Mr. Pentland, in the same volume of the Geological Transactions, makes the following observations on Indian tertiary deposits: “How far the same formation may be prolonged in a southerly “ direction along the peninsulas of Malacca and of Hindoostan it is impossible to say ; although “ we possess proofs of its existence at Madras, where it contains the same species of shells as on “ the Brahma-putra, and at Pondicherry, where it envelopes the great masses of silicified wood “found near that city.” (p. 394.) The formation on which Madras stands is, however, erroneously referred to the tertiary epoch, being a recent alluvium, accumulated by the joint action of the rivers and breakers, and containing the same shells as now inhabit the mud of the salt-water inlets and sea shore of the Carnatic.
   With regard to the age of the silicified wood of Pondicherry, no facts have yet been ascertained which can justify any conclusion. It is, however, to be hoped, that a gentleman familiarly acquainted with the tertiary and volcanic rocks of Greece and Italy, will soon communicate positive information regarding the geological relations of the sandstones containing the silicified trees and the fossil shellsf, the conical hollows, obsidians, and other indications of volcanic action said to exist in that neighbourhood.
   I shall conclude this paper by one or two remarks on the relative age of the Laterite and Trap. Dr. Babington* and Dr. Christie had observed this rock, both below and above the ghats in the latitudes of Seringapatam and Goa, and I have traced it in the deep and narrow valleys ofCoorg, at various heights, from the level of the sea to several thousand feet above it; but as in all those places it rests on syenite or other granitic rocks, from the decomposition of which, in situ, there is much reason to suppose that this remarkable formation is derived, no inference as to its age can be drawn from these facts. At Colter, however, and other places on the coast of the great basaltic district, it rests on the basalt, forming the summits of the hills, or an external layer over the trap which constitutes the body of the hill. This superposition is exhibited in ravines passing through the laterite, or where that rock has thinned^ off so much, that it can be separated from the basalt below, which has most commonly a stratified arrangement, often highly inclined and parallel to the precipitous face of the hill. It has also been observed above the ghats, and in the table-land of the Deckan, between the Godavery and Manjera rivers, resting on basalt; it is therefore probable, that the trap has been protruded from below since the laterite assumed its present form. It would be improper, in this place, to enter into any details regarding a formation which extends over much of the Malay peninsula, Ceylon, the coasts of Coromandel and Malabar, and Central India. In different portions of these vast countries, several varieties of this rock are met with, well deserving of attention, yet its general character and composition is the same over 30 degrees of longitude and 20 of latitude, and nowhere is any proof to be found of its being of volcanic originf, or the equivalent of certain European rocks, as supposed by Elie de Beaumont. Under the name of laterite, however, very different rocks have been included ; such as the ferruginous clays and sandy beds underlying the alluvium of the Irawady, near Rangoon, and a ferruginous conglomerate now forming in many places from decomposed and reconsolidated laterite or syenite, and containing fragments of granite, and occasionally enveloping a recent land shell.
  Besides these, a rock, apparently of igneous origin, has been occasionally confounded with laterite, and in the diamond districts is known to the natives by the same name as is applied to that rock in the Mysore. The thinner strata of the diamond sandstone of the Pennar have been observed to be bent in a remarkable manner by the intrusion of this rock; and in other instances it had apparently escaped in a semifluid state between the joints of the larger tables, carrying with it fragments of the sandstone, whose angles are so well defined, that I thought I could trace the very spot from which they had been broken off. Notwithstanding these appearances, the character of the rock differed so much from any varieties of basalt I had then seen in India, that I hesitated about referring it to the trap family, till I had seen varieties of a red wacke much resembling it, constituting part of the basaltic mountains of the island of Salsette. It is in a substance of this kind, interstratified with sandstone, that Tavernier describes the diamond mines of Beejapoor to have been worked in former times. The transitory nature of the political divisions of this part of India, and the decay or desertion of many towns and villages, have hitherto prevented the identification of these mines; but enough has been said to show the importance of caution in reasoning on individual facts, relative to one of the most singular and extensive formations anywhere to be found.
   The freshwater shells described in the preceding pages, must have inhabited sheets of fresh water of which no traces can now be discovered, in the configuration of the mountainous tracts, in which they for the most part occur. No natural lakes exist in these districts, nor could shells have accumulated in such quantity in rivers similar to those which now intersect the country. It may, however, be supposed that the sandstone and limestone rocks of Berar had once a position similar to that which the same rocks now occupy in the basins of the Kistnah and Pennar. Voysey describes these rivers as passing- through the Nulla-Mulla range by gaps or fissures ff which have been pro- “ duced by some great convulsion, which at the same time that it formed the “beds of these rivers, gave passage to the accumulated waters of some vast ff lakes situated near the outlets.” “The tortuous course of the Kistnah is “bounded for upwards of 70 miles by lofty and precipitous banks, which in ff some places rise 1000 feet above its level, the opposite sides of the chasm " corresponding in an exact manner. Ravines of this description are not un- “frequent all over the range, and the exact correspondence of their salient “and re-entering angles, together with the abruptness of their origin, totally ff preclude the supposition of their being hollowed out by the action of “running water.” Such seems also to have been the case, where the Pennar passes through a narrow gorge in the Gundicottah sandstone hills. Through the upper part of its course, this river flows over a flat country covered with alluvial soil, at right angles to the hills; but it finds an exit through them, by a fracture in the wall which in former times had apparently dammed up its waters. The strata have been much disturbed, probably by the eruption of the basalt, which is seen at the foot of the sandstone hills on the opposite side of the valley, from which the Gundicottah range appears to have been separated. PI. XLV1., Section 2nd. It should, however, be stated, that ravines formed in this sandstone, by the action of the streams now flowing in them, exhibit abrupt precipices, the opposite sides of which correspond to each other as Voysey has described.
  The sections accompanying this paper were constructed by Capt. Smith, of the Madras Engineers, F.R.S., from information contained in my notes made during several journeys in the lines represented, and from some published papers. The information is by no means complete, but, I believe, it will be found to be correct as far as it goes. In consequence of the great length of the lines to be represented, and the comparatively moderate height of the hills, it would have been impossible to have given the different formations of sufficient size to have been seen in a distinct manner without great distortion of the strata, had the whole distance been represented. Breaks, therefore, have been introduced, representing the continuance of the same rock for the number of miles specified in each instance. In the Baulpilly valley and in some other localitiesi (Sect. 2.) the summits of the hills are almost inaccessible, and it has consequently been impossible to represent them as they occur in the exact line of section. 1 have therefore been content to exhibit the strata as they occur at their bases, with the exception of a few of the hills which have been more carefully examined, and which correspond in appearance to those which are as yet unexplored.
  Section 1st passes from the Bangnapilly diamond mines to the valley of the Nerbudda, with the view of connecting Section No. 1, across the peninsula, with a line running north and south through its centre ; and which might easily be continued to the Himalayah mountains to the north and Ceylon to the south.

