A SHORT time since I had the honour of presenting to the Society a series of specimens, illustrative of the physical characters and organic remains of the strata of Tilgate Forest. I now submit to its notice some additional examples of the fossils of those deposits, and beg to offer some further observations on their geological position and relations.
  In my work on the Geology of Sussex, I have mentioned the difficulties which attended the determination of their geognostic position, and the reasons which led me to consider them as related to the Purbeck limestone; but a more accurate survey of the district in which they occur, made in company with my friend Charles Lyell, Esq., Sec. G.S., &c. has enabled me to ascertain that such an opinion is not tenable, and that these strata may with greater propriety be associated with the subordinate beds of limestone, sandstone, and clay, which, in certain parts of Sussex, alternate in the iron-sand formation.
  In the present state of our knowledge, it may be convenient to separate the strata under consideration into two divisions; comprising in the first the Ashburnham limestone, and in the second, the strata of Tilgate Forest, as in the following tabular arrangement.
The strata of the first division (the Ashburnham limestone) have been so fully described in my work, entitled Illustrations of the Geology of Sussex, that it is unnecessary in this brief notice to do more than refer to the account alluded to. These beds underlie the strata of Tilgate Forest, and perhaps may hereafter be ranked with the Purbeck limestone, which in some respects they resemble. The sandstone, &c. of Tilgate Forest are so well characterized by their remarkable fossils, that their existence in remote localities is easily determined. In every quarry where these beds are exposed, their organic remains have been discovered more or less frequently.
Mr. Webster, in 1813, noticed beds of sandstone with intervening layers of clay and sand, in the cliffs at Hastings, and discovered in them the bones, teeth, and other remains of animals and numerous vegetables. The vegetables allied to the Cycas, so commonly found at Tilgate Forest, are also of frequent occurrence in the sandstone of Hastings; large rolled portions of them are constantly seen on the shore, which have been washed out of the cliffs and thrown up by the waves. At Rye and Winchelsea, strata of a similar character have been observed by Mr. Lyell, who informs me, "that the rock on which the latter town is situated, rising from beneath the alluvial marsh by which it is surrounded, presents cliffs more or less abrupt towards every point of the compass. In a quarry on the road-side, near the ancient gateway leading to Rye, the strata are distinctly exposed. The summit and base of the pit consist of sand with layers of friable sandstone; and in the centre a stratum of limestone occurs 5 feet thick. In the cliffs, considerably below the level of the base of the quarry, another bed of limestone is seen imbedded in the ironsand, thus clearly proving the alternation of these deposits. The flat slabs of the limestone of Winchelsea, where weather-worn, exhibit casts of small bivalves, which also appear in the intervening layers of sandstone. Rye, like Winchelsea, is built upon a hillock of the iron-sand formation, containing beds of calciferous sandstone."
  In tracing the Tilgate strata in their course westward, in the direction of a line drawn from Hastings to Framfield, and from thence to Horsham, we find them exposed in several quarries, which have been opened for repairing the roads and other economical purposes; but the surface exposed is too inconsiderable to afford any decisive information respecting their geological position. Chailey, Linfield, Cuckfield, St. Leonards and Tilgate Forests, may be mentioned as the most interesting localities.
Still further to the west the strata are exposed to a considerable extent in the vicinity of Horsham. Mr. Lyell has favoured me with the following section and description of a quarry at Stammerham, near that town.
  "In the calciferous sandstone, No. 10, according to the report of the workmen, the bone of an animal was discovered some years since: organic remains, however, appear to be rare. No shells occur; but branches of vegetables in a carbonized state are often met with. The quarry at Tower Hill, near Stammerham, so nearly resembles the latter, that it is unnecessary to describe it. Near this an incrusting spring rises, which covers the vegetables in the ditches through which it flows, with calcareous tufa.
  In the quarries at Sedgwick, 2 miles from Stammerham, Mr. Lyell observed a large quantity of slabs of paving-stone, many of which were deeply furrowed on both sides. This appearance is common in the sandstone throughout Sussex, and appears to have been formed by the advance and retrocession of the waves.
The dip of the strata near Horsham is very variable: in some instances it takes place in every direction; in others, the beds are nearly horizontal, and are worked over a considerable area without descending deeper."
Mr. Lyell remarks in the same letter, "that upon examining the collection of the Geological Society, he has found, among the specimens from Battle, one which agrees with the calciferous sandstone of Tilgate Forest, and contains carbonized wood: and that among a series of specimens from the cliffs at Hastings, collected by Mr. Webster, which still more closely correspond with those of Tilgate Forest, there are the teeth of fishes and amphibia, and the rib of an animal, inclosed in the rock."
From the preceding observations we may, I think, fairly conclude, that the calciferous sandstone of Rye, Winchelsea, Hastings, Tilgate Forest, and Horsham, are but different portions of the same series of deposits, belonging to the iron-sand formation; the Ashburnham beds being situated beneath them.
The organic remains which I have now the honour to present to the Society, may be considered as characteristic of the strata of Tilgate Forest. They are as follow:

