THE remains of birds are so seldom found in a fossil state, that a notice of unquestionable relics of this class of animals, however imperfect, cannot fail to be interesting to the geologist and comparative anatomist. Mr. Lyell has well remarked in his Principles of Geology, that it might readily have been anticipated, that the fossil bones of birds would be of rare occurrence, since the power of flight possessed by these animals, preserves them from many casualties by which quadrupeds are destroyed and imbedded; and that even when birds are drowned, or chance to die on the water, the tubular structure of their bones, and their feathery coverings, would generally occasion them to float on the surface, until their carcases were devoured. We find, accordingly, but very few authenticated examples of fossil birds, certainly none (with the exception of those which it is my present purpose to describe) that can be referred to strata of an earlier period than the gypsum beds of the Paris basin f. It is true that the thin fragile bones which occur in the slate of Stonesfield were formerly assigned to birds J, but all these are now known to belong to Pterodactyles.
  Soon after my attention was first directed to the fossils of the Wealden of the south-east of England, I discovered in the strata of Tilgate Forest, several bones of such extreme tenuity as could have been required only by animals intended for flight, and some of these, from their close resemblance to the tarso-metatarsal bones of certain Grallce or waders, I was induced to refer to birds§. But when the correctness of the opinion of the late Mr. Miller, that the Stonesfield bones belonged to Pterodactyles, was established, it was naturally conjectured, that the fossils from Tilgate Forest might also have been derived from flying reptiles; and Dr. Buckland expressed a doubt whether there were any certain evidence of the existence of fossil birds in strata more ancient than the tertiary*.” Having subsequently discovered a few specimens with more decided characters, I was led to resume my former opinion, the accuracy of which was confirmed by M. Cuvier, during his last visit to England, who pronounced, without the least hesitation, that the specimens were the bones of some wader, probably a species of Ardea, or heron. Yet, notwithstanding this high authority, the imperfect state of the specimens induced some eminent naturalists to regard the question as still undetermined; their scepticism however will, I trust, be now removed, by the recent discovery of a bone, which, as will hereafter be shown, can be no other than the tarso-metatarsal of a bird.
  A short time since, my friend Mr. Lyell and myself, being engaged in some investigations relating to the fossil bones of turtles, the supposed birds’ bones of the Wealden again came under our notice ; and as the subject was of deep interest, the presumed existence of birds during the period of the secondary formations, resting solely on the evidence afforded by the specimens in my collection, we determined to submit the most characteristic bones to the examination of Mr. Richard Owen, of the Royal College of Surgeons, a gentleman whose profound knowledge of comparative anatomy, is only equalled by the liberality with which he imparts his valuable information to others. Mr. Owen’s attention was first requested to the metatarsal bone above mentioned, and particularly directed to the oval cicatrix (o, fig. 1. b, pi. XIII.) and the longitudinal ridge (X, fig. 1. b) observable in that specimen, both of which are very peculiar characters. The following observations are the result of Mr. Owen’s examination :
   “This fragment (fig. 1. b) is undoubtedly the distal extremity of a left tarso-metatarsal bone of a bird. The oval spot (o,) denotes the articular surface or place of attachment of the posterior or opposable toe, and is a mark of more than ordinary importance, since much may be deduced of the habits of the bird by observing its relative situation to the articular surfaces of the other toes. Thus, in an insessorial, or climbing bird, it is placed nearly on a level with the others, that the back toe may be effectually opposed to the fore toes ; and the same obtains in the raptorial birds for seizing their prey. T infer that your specimen belonged to a wader, and that the back toe was a long one, the better adapted for supporting the body on a marshy soil. The thin longitudinal ridges of bone in the fossil, also agree with what may be observed in the metatarsals of birds; they afford attachment to the aponeurotic thecae, which tie down the tendons as they glide along the metatarsus to the toes. As the soft articular extremity of the bone has been destroyed, it is probable the bird was young, and the epiphysis not anchylosed. Another of the specimens is very like the head of a humerus of a bird, but differs from any in the museum of the College, in the sudden expansion of the head. Fig. 3 appears to be the proximal end of a tibia. In others of the long bones from the Tilgate strata, there are longitudinal grooves which accord with what is observable in the metatarsal bones of birds, but similar grooves appear also to characterise most of the long bones of Pterodactyles. However, the metatarsal bone (fig. 1, a, b,) settles the question in my mind as to the existence of the remains of birds in the strata of Tilgate Forest.”
  The confirmation of my opinion, first by the immortal Cuvier, and now after a rigorous examination of other specimens, by Mr. Owen, must I conceive remove all doubts on the subject, and the occurrence of the remains of birds in strata antecedent to the chalk, be henceforth considered as unquestionably established as that of mammalia in the Stonesfield slate.
  I proceed to describe the specimens of birds' bones in my possession ; they are but few in number, and unfortunately all of them are more or less imperfect, the extreme thinness of the bones, and the compactness of the rock in which they are imbedded, rendering it impossible to extricate them without injury.
   Such are the scanty materials from which I venture to infer the existence of birds during the Iguanodon epoch; and if my deductions be correct, another beautiful instance is alforded of the light shed by anatomical science on the obscure records of the early history of the earth.

