Gentlemen,—Called to address you upon a subject relating to one of the branches of Natural History, the teaching of which the Academy has done me the honour to confide to me, I have thought that a rapid view of the general progress which the physical examination of the globe which we inhabit has made, and still continues to make, might not be without interest. Geology is still a young and new science, and, viewing it in this light, the history of the successes and failings, of the trials felicitous or unfortunate, which have accelerated or retarded its progress; the inspection of those oscillations around the true path, which, in the more advanced sciences, have preceded their fixed and regular march, may present to the contemplation of enlightened men some interesting perceptions with relation to the study of the human mind. Besides, the country of the Saussures and De Lues, and this Academy, which has seen all that is positive and accurate in geology springing from its bosom, could not remain indifferent to the progress of a science to which they have so largely contributed. It can only, however, be a very general sketch of the progressive developments of Geology that I can venture to trace here. And, in the first place, we may divide the picture into two very distinct portions: the first, a period the longest in time, but the poorest in useful results, commencing with the birth of the science, and leading it to the middle of the last century; the period of cosmogonies and geogonies, in which geology, placed in the rank' of vain speculations, presents nothing but fanciful hypotheses, and systems without foundation: the second, in which it really becomes a science, includes but a short space, of from sixty to seventy years, but is distinguished by the constantly increasing extent of solid and useful observations, and by the abandonment of idle geogonical discussions. 
I shall scarcely dwell upon the long period with which the review ought to commence, as it presents but the history of the wanderings of intellect, and hardly affords any result worthy of being preserved. All the nations of antiquity, however, have had their cosmogonies, which, associating themselves with their mythological systems, connected the first origin of things with the history and the greatest interests of the human race. The Jews, and this is a very remarkable fact, were the only nation of antiquity, which, on certain particular points of the history of the earth, have witnessed ideas, the accuracy of which has been demonstrated by the most recent observations of the most improved geology.
The order of succession of organised beings at the surface of the globe, which, in Sacred History, corresponds with the order of their creation, and the comparative recentness of the human race, are indications of a supernatural light thrown in the midst of the profound obscurity and absolute ignorance of the people of primeval times. And the sublime picture of the successive development of organisation upon the Earth, had already existed inscribed at the head of our Sacred Books, many ages before the diligent and scrupulous investigations of geologists and naturalists had attained to the demonstration of its counter proof in the bosom of the solid strata of the rocks and mountains.
To search in the writings of the Hebrew Lawgiver for other data regarding the origin of the world, than those which attribute creation to its true and eternal Author; to hope to find documents respecting the different revolutions which our globe had undergone before the last catastrophe which has left the surface in its present state, and has rendered it susceptible of becoming the abode of man; to wish to discover in a book devoted to man, considered as a moral being, to his duties, and the knowledge of his sublime destination, statements in respect to the physical sciences,—all this may have originated from a respectable source, and from sentiments which cannot be too much praised; but experience has apprised us, that those who, with the purest intentions, have become interpreters of the Sacred Text, in order to find, and have found in it, the confirmation of their own systematic views, have misunderstood its true object, and have benefited neither religion nor science. On the other hand, how culpable are those who have sought, although without success, in the study of the revolutions of the Earth, for weapons to destroy the foundation of the hopes and consolations of the whole human race?
Such are the reflections which naturally arise in the mind of him who is obliged to dig among the philosophico-romantic rubbish of speculative geology, upon reading the numerous Theories of the Earth, those productions of an unrestrained imagination, and an utter ignorance of facts. We shall not fatigue you, gentlemen, with an analysis of the systems of Burnet, Whiston, Woodward, Lazaro-Moro, and so many other more modern authors, whom we see at their pleasure creating inundations and abysses, raising the seas from their beds, calling comets to their assistance, and all to form a fantastic world, utterly different from that which exists. We would more willingly fix our attention upon the first wakening of the spirit of observation, upon that dawn of true science, the first glimmerings of which began to appear at the commencement of the 16th century, when Agricola, a Saxon miner, laid the foundations of mineralogy and the art of mining; when Bernard de Palissy, a mere potter, announced to the Academy of France that the fossil shells were really the work and the abode of animals; when, at a later period, Steno in Tuscany established the distinction between the primitive mountains and the secondary formations.
But I hasten to arrive at the second epoch of the science, that in which the empty knowledge of cosmogonies was superseded by physical geography and mineralogical geology; that in which the principles of the immortal Bacon alone directed a study which had so long been perverted from the true path by imagination and speculative mania.
It was at Geneva that this change was produced; it was De Saussure who first discovered, that the method hitherto followed was not that which conducts to truth, and who proved, by his example, that the natural history of the Earth, studied according to the same principles as the other physical sciences, would furnish itself alone and independently of every foreign idea, results sufficiently numerous and important to merit the particular attention of correct and enlightened minds.
It is not before you, gentlemen, several of whom have heard those great truths developed, in this very place, and upon days like the present, by the philosopher himself of whom I am speaking; it is not to those whom the remembrance of this illustrious man disposes perhaps at this moment to listen with more indulgence to his grandson, that I shall offer excuses for dwelling with a lively satisfaction upon the services which he has rendered to science.
To form a correct estimate of what Saussure has done for geology, we must see what it was when he first entered upon its study,—the spirit which directed him in its pursuit,—the state in which he left it,—and the impulse which his writings have given to those who have come after him. Without entering into details, we shall yet remark, that, at the period at which he commenced his labours, mineralogy and chemistry were still in their infancy ; that the study of rocks scarcely existed; that, of the small number of facts in physical geography related in former works, which might have served as a guide to him, he quickly discovered that several had been too much generalized, and that others were entirely erroneous. The topography of the districts over which he travelled, and which are now the resort of all Europe, was less known than is at the present day that of the Cordilleras or the Himalaya Mountains. There existed no charts of the Alps, and if he had not, on this occasion, as on many others, derived the most important aids from his friend, our learned colleague Mr Pictet, he must have renounced the advantage, indispensable in our day, of giving a graphic representation of the places which he described. Thus, on all hands, he met with nothing but obstacles; he had to make for himself, by dint of labour, a path into those fearful deserts, as into the domain of a science whose vast unexplored extent presented itself before him.
Persuaded, as he says himself, that physical geography, or the description of our globe, can alone serve as a basis for geology, he proposed to investigate, first the mountains which surround us, and afterwards those of more remote countries. He commenced with a profound examination of the minerals which our soil produces; he classed them according to a method so philosophical, so independent of every idea foreign to their nature, of all hypothesis of origin, and of every consideration of position; he described them with so much clearness, that, notwithstanding the changes effected in the nomenclature, we still, at the present day, easily recognise, by means of his descriptions, the rocks even the most difficult to distinguish.
Embracing the study of the Earth in its most extended acceptation, to the examination of minerals, and the stratification of rocks, he added that of the physical structure of mountain chains, of the form, direction, and probable origin of valleys; he sought, in the present arrangement of strata, and in the disposition of the fissures by which they are traversed, data for determining their original position ; he recognised, in the action of external agents, the operation by which they daily eat, by little and little, into those rocks, so hard and apparently so indestructible. It was this which led him to observations upon the glaciers, the snows accumulated, from time immemorial, upon the declivities of our Alps; and it was still his desire of advancing physical geography, that gave rise to his labours in physics, and, in particular, to his Treatise on Hygrometry. Thus, with him, everything converged toward one object,—that of collecting materials for the history of the globe.
In proportion to the avidity with which he sought for facts, was the care with which he avoided vain speculations. If he sometimes advances a hypothesis, it is with a reserve justly admired, although rarely imitated, and only when the facts seem imperiously to command it. When new facts come in opposition to his former opinions, he abandons or modifies them without regret.
He has even carried this wise restraint so far, that that comprehensiveness of mind winch, in the immensity of science, attaches itself still more to what is to do, than to what has been done, may have been taken for a too great timidity in generalising his observations. But, if Saussure, after forty years of assiduous study, in the part of the Alps comprised between the Tyrol and the Mediterranean, during which he attached himself particularly to the central part of the chain, the most difficult to explore, and the most extensive,—if Saussure, in exposing the general results of his observations, has not been led to discover that regular succession of formations which the German geologists were the first to detect; if he avows, that the countries
which he has explored have presented only infinite varieties in the mineralogical order of the rocks, with relation to the physical structure of tile chain; all this finds a ready explanation (and those who are acquainted with the mineralogical geography of Europe will be convinced of it), in thecircumstance, that there is no country less adapted for the regular study of formations than the chain in our neighbourhood, and which is itself only a small portion of the vast geognostical system which may be denominated the Chain of the Alps.
An inconsiderable number of different formations occupy there a prodigious space; the strata of which they are composed present gigantic masses, and their structure assumes such a degree of development, that mere subordinate beds cover a much greater surface than elsewhere whole independent formations.
Add to this; the irregularity in the position of the strata, their numerous and enormous contortions, the absolute want of relation between themineralogical and the physical structure of this portion of the chain, and say if it was possible, for even the greatest genius left to itself, to discover that regularity in the order of succession of formations which has been traced in other countries, in characters so clear and so easily accessible; since, even at the present moment, with all the perfection to which geology has attained, and, notwithstanding the great number of expert observers who have travelled among the Alps, we have not yet discovered the key of the enigmatic arrangement of the formations of which they are composed.
But, if we consider the list of agenda which concludes his works, we shall there see exposed, under the form of questions, all the most important positive or negative results to which the study of the Earth should lead. Without doubt, the great improvements which have been made in thescience, would require the addition of a considerable number of questions; without doubt, also, several of these problems have been resolved by theillustrious author, or by his successors; but the greater number still require to be answered; and these agenda, although published thirty years ago, should still, at the present day, form an indispensable guide to him whose object is to pursue the study of geology in its full extent. They have marked out all the routes which should be travelled by him who wishes to embrace that study in its most comprehensive acceptation. The means of observation may be ameliorated, the result simplified or generalised, but every where in the fundamental questions do we find the impress of the steps of Saussure upon the path of truth. It is not, therefore, so much the number, or even the importance of the detailed observations; it is the spirit which has guided him in the whole of his career, the spirit with which he has animated Dolomieu, Spallanzani, Palassou, and those who have immediately followed his traces in the purely philosophical investigation of nature; it is that spirit which he has excited, which renders him worthy of being considered as the illustrious representative of the new era of geology.
MORE fortunate than Saussure, in respect to the country submitted to his examination, the illustrious Werner, placed at the head of the most celebrated mining—school of Saxony, in a country where, over an inconsiderable extent, varied with plains and mountains, of which none exceeds the height of 700 fathoms, accessible on all sides, whether at their surface; in their interior, perforated and riddled as they are in all directions by innumerable subterraneous works,—-Werner, rich in the possession of facts acquired from his predecessors and experienced miners, saw expanded before him, and, as it were in miniature, the almost complete picture of the different formations, which, elsewhere, are ordinarily separated by immense extents of land and sea, disguised and irregular in their stratification and develop ment. He saw in Saxony these formations present themselves upon a small scale, in a regular succession, arranged according to the order of their antiquity, from the summits of the chains to the bottoms of the valleys.
,- No doubt, to a mind less observant than his, to a mind endowed in a less eminent degree with that sagacity which discovers and arranges facts according to their natural relations, Nature had in vain unfolded the picture of' her successive operations. Werner possessed in the highest degree the qualities which constitute a naturalist; in Mineralogy, he was what Linnaeus was in the other departments of Natural History. He invented a language for his favourite science ; and not only did he augment the catalogue, previously much restricted, of mineral substances, but he gave to their characters a precision hitherto unknown,--he described the rocks, their varieties of structure, and their position. He characterised, in short, the different formations, those assemblages of strata connected together by a constant association, which, to employ for an instant the most expressive language 
of hypothesis, appear to have been formed at one and the same period, by similar means, and under similar circumstances. In other words, be subdivided the great classes of primitive and secondary rocks, into particular and independent groups, which he classed according to their relations of superposition and antiquity.
The establishment of Formations is the most fertile idea which has sprung from the intellect of this illustrious man; it enlarges the point of view, and, at the same time, simplifies the field of observation. It was also a happy distinction which he made, when be separated from both the Primitive and Secondary, that, class of rocks which is intercalated between them, and which equally participates of the nature of both. This innovation, the propriety of which has been often disputed, has, nevertheless, been retained even by those very persons who have attacked it and the division of transition-rocks has been respected, because founded upon the basis of nature. .
In short, Werner may be regarded as the creator of that portion of the science which he has named Geognosy, and which treats especially of the superposition of mineral masses. To many claims to the gratitude of geologists, Werner has still added that of having formed, by his example, a multitude of distinguished naturalists, who, having acquired at Freyberg a passion for the study of minerals, have carried with them into the different countries of Europe, the principles of observation and the doctrine of their master. Jameson and Weaver in Great-Britain, D’Aubuisson and Brochant in France, Brocchi in Italy, Charpentier in Switzerland, and Humboldt and Von Buch in“ Prussia, have excited a high idea of the school in which they have studied. 
Observations, however, had multiplied; and their relations to the types of Werner seemed to become always less and less distinct ; insomuch, that geologists no longer understood each other. The labour of reconciling these different opinions was undertaken by; the celebrated Humboldt, who, originally a pupil of Wérner, had extended his observations not only over the two Americas, but also over the greater part of Europe. His work is an inestiamable treasure of accurately observed facts; it is the most methodical collection that exists in geognosy, and should be profoundly studied by those who engage in the pursuit of that science. In it, we find the types of Werner rather extended than altered. He demonstrates how the simplicity of these types is often disguised by the periodical alternation of two neighbouring formations, toward their mutual limits; how a system of strata is often rendered scarcely recognisable by the development of one of its strata, in particular, at the expence of the others; and, lastly, how certain products reappear, as by oscillation, at certain different epochs of the series.
' This misunderstanding existed only with those ignorant of the facts and principles of the Wernerian Geognosy. '
Considering the science in this manner under a very elevated and very general point of view, he succeeded in explaining many discrepancies, and in dissipating many doubts. Lastly, he admits with M. D’Aubuisson, the complements and rectifications which experience has shown to be necessary in the geognostical system of Werner. It is with a rapid view of these more recent observations that I shall conclude this sketch. For this purpose, it becomes necessary to fall a little behind in the chronological order.
This impulse given by the School of Werner gave rise to some remarkable discoveries. Without speaking of the labours of the distinguished geologist whom Switzerland has lately lost, M. Escher de la Luith, or of those of Von Buch in Norway, which shewed, to the great astonishment of the scientific world, a granite covering rocks containing shells, we arrive all at once at the discovery of a new class of formations, rich in animal remains in rocks and minerals, and still more in important truths; I mean the last solid strata deposited at the surface of the earth,--the Tertiary Formations ; which were unknown to Werner, or which he had confounded with the alluvial deposits v. It is to the united labours of Messrs Cuvier and Brongniart, that we owe the examination, and, at the same time, the admirable description, of these formations, such as they present themselves in the greatest development around the capital of France.
It is not merely as having enriched Zoology with a multitude of extinct species of almost every class of animals, and Geology with several new strata, and especially with general results of the highest interest, that the Geographic Mineralogique des Environs de Paris, deserves the high reputation which it enjoys. Nor yet is it for the complete description of these formations, so remarkable for the alternation of mobile with solid strata, and by those of masses full of shells and animals, which inhabit the land or fresh water, with petrified strata of the remains of marine animals; but it is as a perfect model of geological investigation that this work should be particularly cited; and, moreover, as having enriched geology with a new class of distinctive characters, taken from the constant presence of certain genera, or of certain species of animals in the same strata. All the questions relative to the distribution of fossil organic bodies, in the strata of greater or less antiquity, to the identity or difference of these animals with the analogous species which exist at the present day, had been strongly recommended to the examination of geologists in the Agenda of Saussure; but, until undertaken by Messrs Cuvier and Brongniart, these problems, equally difficult as important, had found no one capable of resolving them.
M. Brongniart is at present pursuing the examination of the zoological characters, in the more recent strata of secondary formations, and continues to add with Ferussac, Sowerby, Schlottheim and Wahlenberg, new species of fossil shells to the catalogue commenced by Bruguiere, Montfort and Parkinson, and much enriched, and methodically classed by Lamarck.
The crustacea of M. Desmarest, the fossil vegetables of M. Adolphe Brongniart, and the immortal work of M. Cuvier, upon the osseous remains of the vertebral animals, show the astonishing impulse given by men, animated with the true and philosophical spirit of investigation, to this interesting part of the history of the globe, where all the branches of Natural History seem to unite and amicably join hand in hand, to penetrate together into the obscurity of those vast catacombs, overwhelmed with the debris of the antediluvian world.
The labours of Messrs Cuvier and Brongniart, have'given anew a favourable direction to Zoology. Their discoveries have rapidly fructified; the domain of the tertiary formations has been extended; Mr Webster has discovered! them in the basin of London; Messrs Constant Prevost and Beudant, in that of Vienna in Austria; Messrs Beudant, Ferussac, and Omalius' D’Halloy, in several parts of France; Messrs Brocchi and Brongniart, in the sub-appenine hills of Italy, and the subalpine ones of Piedmont, the Verronese and Vicentine; but with local differences sufficiently marked, to induce us to think with M. de Ferussac, that the tertiary formations present no general rule in‘ the order of superposition of their strata, and that each basin has its peculiar formations. '
 De Luc and De Saussure had already shewn fresh water fishes and shells in strata connected with marine deposits
At the same time, the engineers of mines of France have been labouring at the mineralogical statistics of the different departments; and we expect, from the zeal of the French geologists, soon to see the mineralogical geography of that kingdom, as well known as is at present that of England.
The long-continued contr0versy between the Neptunians and Volcanists, regarding the origin of the basaltic and trap-rocks, turned from its original point of view, whether by the influence of the systematic ideas of Werner, or by the partial manner in which the volcanist geologists had looked upon the problem, appears to be drawing towards an end. In fact, the question has 'un-‘ dergone a decided change, since the time when the school of Werner supported the aflueous origin of these rocks, and the identity of the mode of their formation with that of the secondary strata containing shells; and when the volcanists, misled by the frequent association of basalt with scoriform and porous la;vas, regarded them as true currents, which had issued from the crater of a volcanic cone, and had run at the surface of the earth, or beneath the waters of the sea; since the moment, when minute mineralogical distinctions, which experience has since proved to be as useless as they were subtile, separated the basalts and porphyries produced by fire, from those which were acknowledged to be of aqueous origin. '
I At that time the remarkable phenomena, noticed in Scotland by Hutton, Playfair and Hall, were unknown, or rather, associated with a theory of the earth, otherwise inadmissible, they had made but'a feeble impression ; and the volcanic phenomena, known only from the external appearances of Vesuvius and Ft
us, were far from presenting themselves in all their variety and generality. They had even appeared so local and accidental to Werner, that he did not deign to take notice of the mineralogical distinction of their productions, and considered the decomposition of pyrites, and the inflammation of some beds of coal, as agents perfectly sufficient for producing subterraneous fires.
Already, however, Auvergne and the Vivarais, had drawn D’Aubuisson from the ideas which he had carried with him from Freyberg, and which he had laboured to support; but it was from the great and beautiful observations of Humboldt in the Andes, of Von Buch in the Canary Isles, of Beudant in Hungary, that there resulted the just appreciation of the nature of volcanic phenomena.
I cannot here enter into details. Let it therefore suffice to say, that, from the small volcano of Stromboli, which has from time immemorial ejected stones and lava every quarter of an hour, to the immense Antisana, whose lateral eruptions only take place from one century to another,—-from the still burning, to the ex; tinct volcanoes,—there is presented great variety in their nature and productions; that, from some of these volcanoes, there issue, periodically, rivers of lava, whether from the crater, situated at the summit of volcanic cones, or from mouths formed upon their sides; while others have no crater ; and the mineral torrents, issuing from their base, present no appearance of an orifice toward their source. Lastly, the Canary Islands, and the remarkable volcano of J orullo, have presented not only lavas, which, in flowing at» the surface of the soil, have followed the declivities; but masses, raised from the interior of the earth, in a state of incandescence, which have replaced, with arid and desolate rocks, a vast extent of cultivated and fertile land.
The variety of formations, in which we find craters of eruption, or craters of elevation, open, have demonstrated, that thefires, from which these different productions issue, can only be looked for beneath all the strata known, even the most ancient; While the diversity of matters, which cover the one or other of these productions, testifies, that the phenomena, to which they owe their existence, are manifested at different periods, during the formation of the secondary deposits. There, then, we have the domain of fire considerably extended, in space and in time already a series of volcanic rocks, distinguished from the Neptunian rocks, ranges in chronological order,‘ side by side, with the tertiary and secondary formations. But, ought We to stop short here, and are there not, equally with the transition rocks, un~ stratified crystalline masses, which require to be separated from the strata containing shells, or those of fragmentary or brecciated composition. We have said elsewhere, and we repeat it here with more confidence, that “ the formations of basalt, trachyte, porphyry, and granite, to whatever period they belong, and whatever he the deposits which they accompany, or which they traverse, have certain common geological characters, which separate them from the regularly stratified shelly formations. These formations are, as it were, separated links of a great chain, which is attached by one of its ends to the volcanoes.” To the observations made in Scotland, which have already appeared to us decisive, further confirmations have been added from other quarters: thus rocks evidently volcanic have been seen intimately associated with transition syenites and porphyries, by Humboldt in Mexico, and Beudant in Hungary. Mr Boué has seen, in the Hartz, and in the neighbourhood of Freyberg itself, in those mountains of the Erzgebirge which were the object of Werner’s particular study, porphyritic and granitic masses, similar to those of Scotland, and bearing evident marks of their posteriority to the rocks which they traverse, I had almost said of their elevation from beneath. Lastly, Von Bueh has observed, in the Tyrolese Alps, analogous phenomena so striking, that he is induced to conclude, that the elevation of the mountains is a natural consequence of the protrusion of these enormous masses of porphyry, I delight to recall here the recital of these remarkable observations, which I have had the good fortune to hear from the very mouth of that illustrious geologist, in the mountains of Carinthia and Carniola, where phenomena, similar to those of the Tyrol, although less evident, are still observed.
These are the victories gained by observation over hypothesis, these the numerous results which the remains of the old speculative spirit had so long concealed from the view of naturalists. Let us continue, therefore, to follow that method. the only wise, the only profitable and truly philosophical, which patiently col
lects facts, and arranges them, according to their natural relations, and not according to fallacious analogies or theories, established a priori.
To labour to describe geologically in detail, and strictly according to nature, the country which he is called to examine; to make use of all the aids afforded, by a more perfect knowledge of mineralogy, and of the study of fossil organic bodies; to employ sketches and topographical charts, to represent, with fidelity, the geological constitution of each district, the form, position, and alternation of strata, their accidents and veins; to connect thus the localities already examined, by the investigap tion of the intermediate places ;—such are the objects which, at the present day, the geologist should have in view. The science requires detailed facts to establish accurate comparisons between the various points of the globe, and avoid those hasty analogies to which the propensity to a seductive, but dangerous display of erudition, sometimes induces us to deliver ourselves, and which produce only confusion in the science.
But, of what use, it may be asked, are those investigations of sterile tracts, arid rocks, stones without value, and worthless petrif'actions? What advantage can be derived to society, from the knowledge of the age, and nature of these volcanic rocks, if it cannot prevent the Torre del greco from being traversed by lavas, and the plains of Naples and Sicily from being overwhelmed by heaps of cinders
I venture to hope, that such a question will never be proposed at Geneva, in a city where science has always been honoured and cherished. If it were, however, necessary to shew, that geology has as often contributed to the amelioration of the condition of individuals as to the advantage of states, I would invite you to cast a glance upon the magnificent work of M. Heron de Villefosse, to see what the working of mines, of all sorts, has gained, by the improvement of geognosy. I might point out services rendered to agriculture and geography, by the advancement of our knowledge in physical geography. Lastly, I might cite the salthprings given to WVestern Germany, the inexhaustible salt_mine of Vic to France, solely through well applied geological calculations, as well as the mines of lithoid carbonate of iron, of so much importance in England, discovered in the coal formations of France, by M. Le Gallois, who had studied its geological relations in England. ‘
But I must not detain you longer with this subject; and were it not well known, at the present day, that, in those nations which have cultivated the sciences only with reference to their economical applications, the sources of discovery have been clogged, :I might recal to your attention the words of the discourse, addressed to one of the first learned bodies in Europe, the Royal Society of London, and with these words I shall conclude.
“ You ought to have in view the applications of science, as often as they present themselves in practice, without ever forgetting the dignity of your researches, the noble result of which is, to exalt the powers of the understanding, and increase the sphere of the intellectual enjoyments, by enlarging the picture of nature, and by putting in evidence the power, the wisdom, and the goodness, of the Author of all that exists.”


