AT has generally been believed, that the beaver was once indigenous to different parts of Britain, particularly Wales and Scotland. I shall first notice the evidence of the existence, in former times, of the beaver in Wales; for, in this way, as will presently appear, some light may be thrown on the question of its having likewise been one of the native quadrupeds of Scotland.
The earliest written authority on this subject, is contained in a document of the 9th century, which has been published in the Leges Wallicae of Dr Wotton. In Book iii. § 11, 12. of the Laws of Hywel Dha, where the prices of furs are regulated,
The Beaver's (Llosdlydan or Castor) at no less than 120 d. or at five times the price of the marten's fur, and ten times the price of the otter's. It thus appears, that the beaver was then hunted in Wales for the sake of its fur; that this skin was held in high estimation; and that the beaver had already, before the close of the 9th century, become a scarce animal in this country.
The next authority is contained in the " Itinerarium Cambriae" of Giraldus de Barri. This writer, it may be remarked, made his journey into Wales, towards the end of the 12th century, as the attendant of Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury, whose zeal led him personally to excite the Welchmen to join in the projected crusades. That Giraldus was inclined to be an observer of nature, is proved by the single fact, that when he arrives on the confines of the river Teivi in Cardiganshire, he immediately makes a long digression on the natural history of the beaver. Although he rehearses some of the exploded fables of the ancients, yet other parts of his account are very accurate, and may be considered as bearing the marks of a description made from actual observation. In the simple and bold language of a man who knew the truth of what he was writing, he says of the Teivi, "Inter universos Cambriae seu etiam Lloegriae fluvios, solus hie castores habet;" and adds, "In Albania quippe, ut fertur, fluvio similiter unico habentur, sed rari." We may perhaps infer from this cautious mode of expression, that the author intended to contrast the nature of his evidence, and to intimate, that the fact previously mentioned depended on surer grounds, or on his own observation. But the very cautiousness of the language in which the report relative to Albania is repeated, ought, perhaps, to increase our reliance on its authenticity. It would appear, therefore, that in the 12th century, the beaver probably still existed in Scotland, but was then a scarce animal.
The first of the native topographers and historians of Scotland whose works assumed a printed form, and have come down to us, is Hector Boece, who wrote his Description and History towards the end of the 15th century. After describing the dimensions of Loch Ness, he says. Here the fibri are enumerated with such perfect confidence among the other quadrupeds whose furs were in request for exportation, that we may seem fastidious as to evidence, if we hesitate to admit that beavers were still to be found at Loch Ness, in the time of the author. But the " incomparable number" of Boethius, may well stagger our belief; and forms a singular contrast with the " single river" and "rarity" mentioned by Giraldus three centuries before.
  It may further be remarked, that Bellenden, in the translation of Boethius which he undertook (probably about the year 1536) at the request of King James V., while he omits the cervi, capreoli, and even the lutrce, mentions bevers without the slightest hesitation. His words are. It must be confessed, however, that the carelessness of the translation, as evinced by the very passage in question, detracts from the conclusiveness of Bellen. den's testimony; for it seems at least fully as probable that there were fallow-deer and roes in the forests of Loch Ness, as that there were wild horses there; and it admits of no doubt whatever, that otters were then to be found on the banks of the lake, for they are so to this day.
  After diligent inquiry, I have not been able to find, that any trace of the remains of these animal has ever occurred in the neighbourhood of Loch, Ness. What is more remarkable, in the extensive excavations along the line of the Caledonian Canal, from Inverness to Corpach, and in the course of deepening, by means of a dredging-machine, the bed of Loch Dochfour, no bones of the beaver have occurred.
The accuracy both of Boece and of Bellenden seems to be strongly impugned by this important fact, that no mention of beavers occurs in any of the public records of Scotland now extant. In an act dated June 1484, c . 82. " Of the custome of furringis," mertricks, fowmartes (pole-cats), otters, and tods, are specified; but not a word is said of beavers, although these, had they existed, must have been the most valuable of all, not only for their furs, but for the substance called castor, which in those days still retained its repute as a medicine. As it is pretty plain from their writings, that neither the historiographer nor his translator had the slightest claim to the character of being naturalists, and as both give abundant proofs of their nationality, in boasting beyond measure of the products of their country, it may be considered as not improbable that the beaver had been exterminated in Scotland before their time, although the tradition regarding its existence in former days was so strong and general, as to lead them to enumerate it without hesitation among the wild animals of the country.
  Sir Robert Sibbald does not, on this topic, show any of that precision, and zeal for inquiry, which characterize many other parts of his writings. He contents himself with referring to Boece, in proof of the beaver having formerly been found in Scotland, and adds, with seeming indifference, "An nunc reperiatur nescio."
  No modern writer on the natural history of Scotland, seems to have examined the subject. The late Dr Walker, Professor of Natural History in the University of Edinburgh, in his "Mammalia Scoticaf," merely says, that beavers formerly existed in this country, but are not now to be found. In his lectures, however, the Doctor used to mention, that the Scots Highlanders still retain, by tradition, a peculiar Gaelic name for the animal.
  In order to satisfy myself with regard to the value of this traditionary evidence, I applied to the venerable and learned Dr Stuart of Luss,—a gentleman distinguished both as a naturalist and a Celtic scholar,—and the friend and fellow traveller of Pennant and of Lightfoot in their principal excursions through Scotland. From him I received a confirmation of Dr Walker's statement, that the ancient Gaelic name of the beaver is still known to the Highlanders in the remote western districts of Scotland. "The name (says the Doctor) is Losleathan, derived from los, the tail, point or end of a thing, and leathan, broad; or Dobhran losleathan, the broad-tailed otter." The similarity between this Gaelic name, handed down by tradition to the 19th century, and the Welsh name (Llosdlydan) recorded in the Leges Wallicae of the 9th century, is very striking: the etymology of the names is evidently the same; and indeed they may be regarded as identical. Dr Stuart adds, that he recollects to have heard of a tradition among the Highlanders, which he thinks is probably still preserved in the country, that the " beaver or broad-tailed otter onae abounded in Lochaber."
  I have now to state, that the evidence, written and traditionary, which has just been detailed, tending to show that beavers formerly inhabited Scotland, has received the most ample confirmation, from the occurrence of unaltered fossil remains of the animal on two occasions; first to the north, and next to the south of the Forth.
The first instance I have to mention, occurred a good many years ago. From an entry in the minutes of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, dated 16th December 1788, it appears, that " Dr Farquharson presented to the Society the fossil skeleton of the head and one of the haunch-bones of a beaver," dug up in Perthshire. These bones are still preserved in the Museum of the Society; and I was liberally allowed to examine them, and compare them with others. The back part of the cranium is gone; and the zygomatic arch of the left orbit is shattered; a part of one side of the lower jaw-bone is likewise broken; of the incisores, only some remains of those of the lower jaw now exist The " haunch-bone," or left os innominatum of the pelvis, is quite entire. All the bones are dyed of a deep chocolate colour. From the state of the sutures of the cranium, and from the size of the bones of the nose, which are complete, this animal appears to have been of full growth, but not aged.
The remains were found in the parish of Kinloch, near the foot Of the Grampian Mountains. The Loch of Marlee, on the property of Mr Farquharson of Invercauld, is the last or lowest of a series of small lakes, extending almost from Dunkeld to Blairgowrie, nearly in the direction of the high road between these places. This loch had been partly drained, for the sake of the marl which it contained. In one of the marl-pits on the margin of this loch, under a covering of peat-moss between five and six feet thick, the beaver's skeleton was discovered. The bones already mentioned, being the firmest and most perfect, were found by the workmen; and being accidentally seen by Dr Farquharson, were carried by him to Edinburgh, and presented, as already mentioned, to the Antiquarian Society.
  In a neighbouring marl-pit, a pair of deer's horns, of large dimensions, and branched, were found nearly at the same time; and, along with these, two "leg-bones, so deeply grooved as to appear like double bones." These last, it has been suggested to me by Dr Barclay, were probably the metatarsal bones of a large species of deer, which appears to have been contemporary with the beaver, and perhaps to have been exterminated much about the same period with that animal.
  The second instance occurred so lately as October 1818, on the estate of Kimmerghame, in the parish of Edrom, near the head of that district of Berwickshire called the Merse. Since this estate was acquired by the present proprietor Mr Bonar, banker in Edinburgh, he has made important improvements. In the course of these, he drained a morass called Middlestot's Bog. Under the peat-moss here, a layer of shell-marl occurs, varying in thickness from four to eight feet. Different marl-pits have been opened; and in one of these, the remains of the beaver were found. They were situated at the depth of seven feet from the surface, under a layer of peat-moss of that thickness. It is remarked in a letter from Mr Thomas Dickson, overseer at Kimmerghame, to Mr Bonar junior (who took a lively interest in this investigation), that a layer of a kind of loose whitish substance, generally occurs between the bed of compact peatmoss and the bed of marl. From a specimen sent to Edinburgh, this substance appears to consist of several musci which grow in marshy situations, much decayed, but among which Sphagnum latifoHum, S. capillifolium, and Hypnum cuspidatum can be readily distinguished. The bones of the beaver were imbedded partly in this loose and spongy matter, and partly in the marl below. Only the hard bones of the cranium and face, and the jaw-bones, retained enough of their firm texture to fit them for being removed and preserved in a dry state. Around these, however, dispersed in rather a promiscuous manner, were many bones, which, from their size and appearance, evidently belonged to the same animal. Several of the long bones and vertebrae, while they remained in situ, seemed perfect; but on being touched, they were found to be nearly in a state of dissolution; and though some were carefully taken out, they speedily mouldered down on being exposed to the air, and becoming dry. The apparent dislocation of the skeleton is not to be ascribed to violence, but to the gradual separation of the parts by unequal subsidence. The appearance of the marl, in which delicate shells, of the genera Lymnea and Succinea, could be traced, indicates a long continued state of tranquillity.
  Mr Bonar junior having carried the skull and lower jaw-bone to Edinburgh, presented them to Professor Jameson, for the College Museum; and at his request I have drawn up this notice. Mr Bonar subsequently transmitted specimens of the different layers of the peat-moss, and of the vegetable remains which occur in it, and also of the marl. Among the vegetable remains, common filbert nuts, or at least the shells of the nuts, were abundant. A large specimen of Boletus suberosus so greatly resembled the hoof of some animal, that it had been laid aside as such by the workmen; but the tubes and pores are sufficiently distinct to afford characters. The overseer mentions in his letter, that the fossil-wood which is found, is "principally birch and alder; with some oak, though not much of it; but no kind of fir-cones have been observed."
  Mr Bonar has in his possession a pair of horns belonging to the large species of deer already mentioned, of great size, and with fine antlers, found in the same marl-pit, and near the same spot, only two days before the occurrence of the beaver's remains.
The head of the beaver from Berwickshire is in a much more perfect state than that from Perthshire. The cranium and bones of the face are entire; so is the lower jaw-bone; all the four incisores are perfect, retaining the peculiar kind of coloured enamel which clothes the outer half of the circumference of the tooth; the cutting edges remain fully as sharp as in recent specimens from Hudson's Bay. The molares are also complete: It is considered as almost characteristic of the beaver that the grinders are without distinct fangs; but in this specimen, root-like bases are seen projecting from some of the teeth, through their sockets into the orbits. The bones are dyed of a brownish hue, but not nearly so dark as those from Perthshire: the exterior enamel above mentioned, which in recent specimens is of a brownish-yellow or dull orange colour, has become almost jet black.
  On comparing these fossil heads with recent ones from Hudson's Bay and Canada, in the possession of Professor Jameson and of Dr Barclay, it appears that they all belong to the same species of Castor; but although there seem to be no sufficient specific distinctions, it may be mentioned, that the two fossil specimens have a greater resemblance to each other in general shape and proportions, than to any of four recent specimens with which they have been compared. In the fossil specimens, in particular, the nasal bones are proportionally larger than the same parts in the recent specimens.
Both the fossil heads appear to have belonged to full grown animals. This opinion rests on two grounds: 1. On a comparison, in regard to general dimensions, with recent specimens from Hudson's Bay, brought home by Mr Auld of Leith, and known to have belonged to full grown beavers; and, 2. On the state of the sutures and ridges of the cranium. In the Perthshire specimen, the squamous sutures of the parietal bones are partly obliterated; and in the Berwickshire specimen, although these sutures are distinct, yet the crest or ridge between the two temporal muscles, in the course of the sagittal suture, is considerably raised; and in the Hudson's Bay skulls, both these characters are known equally to indicate the adult or perfect state. Neither of the fossil skulls, however, had belonged to an old animal; for, in a Canadian specimen in Dr Barclay's collection, not only are several of the sutures nearly obliterated, but the component pieces of the cuneiform bone, and the cuneiform process of the occipital bone, are united; while in both the fossil specimens, the divisions remain evident; circumstances which satisfactorily show that this Canadian specimen had been older than any of the others, although it is certainly not of larger dimensions.
The Scottish specimens, it may be remarked, seem very much to agree with a fossil beaver's head described and figured by M. Cuvier, in his "Recherches sur les Ossemens fossiles de Quadrupedes," vol. iv. sect. De rongeurs fossiles. This specimen was found by M. Traulle", in a peat-moss in the Valley of the Somme in Picardy. The same peatmoss afforded, as with us, large horns of deer.

