HAVING been stationed at the Bermudas, at different periods between the years 1827 and 1833, I made a series of notes on the peculiarities of their structure, and the following memoir is the result. Much information was derived from sources which are no longer accessible, such as the aspect and arrangement of the strata, presented by large excavations made during the progress of the works, conducted by the Royal Engineer Department, and are either no longer in existence, or are masked by revetements.
  Though the Bermudas are barren of mineralogical interest, they have yet claims to attention in the striking lithological resemblance, which some of their rocks bear to chalk and other secondary limestones ; and I hope that my descriptions may afford a clue to the origin and nature of those formations. Conceiving also that a comparison of the Bermudas with the coral islands in the Pacific, described by Kotzebue, might be instructive, I have given references to those passages in the work of that author, which present any analogy or important variation.
  The Summer Isles, Somers’ Islands, or Bermudas, (see Plate VI.) consist of a group of about 150 islets, lying within a space of fifteen miles by five, and containing altogether nearly twenty-one square miles. This singular little archipelago is situated very near, and conformably to, the south-east side of an elongated ring of what are commonly called f coral reefs, and rudely approaching the shape of an ellipse, twenty-five miles long by thirteen broad. The direction of the group, as well as that of the major-axis of the reef, to which it is parallel, is about north-east and south-west. Although of a more regular form than any exhibited by Kotzebue, it bears a considerable resemblance to the Otdia, or Romanzoff islands. The principal islands are generally separated by channels, from ten to twenty feet deep, and many of the spaces between the smaller islands are fordable. The depth within the reef rarely exceeds twelve or fourteen fathoms.
   The highest land is at Sear’s Hill, immediately above and to the westward of Harrington Sound. Its summit may be about 260 feet above the sea; that of Gibbs’ Hill is 245 feet. These and all the other numerous small eminences, have much the appearance of sand hills in shape, and chalk downs in colour.
   The whole of the islands are composed of calcareous rocks, derived from comminuted shells and corals; and vary in texture from loose sand to a hard compact limestone, susceptible of a good polish. The varieties are irregularly associated, and without any order of superposition f.
   From the saddle-shaped sections observable throughout the islands, the strata have evidently been accumulated round numerous and contiguous centres: the question as to the agency to which this is attributable, will be discussed in its proper place]:.
   The bottom of the basin consists of coral reefs (which do not appear above low water mark, except at spring tides) and calcareous sand, the last being associated with considerable tracts of chalky ground, in which the best anchorages are found. I have met with this chalk likewise as a constituent of the rock, lying irregularly among its beds in a soft state, or lining caverns, but seldom exceeding a few square yards in surface, and a few inches in depth.
  The islands are covered with about a foot of dry, red earth, containing vegetable matter, and behaving before the blowpipe exactly like common aluminous earth.
  The only minerals which have been noticed, are small pieces of oxide of iron, of very questionable origin ; menaccanite, found near the ferry between St. George’s Island and Bermuda or Main Island; arragonite, and a minute quantity of manganese in the red earth.
  Unless immediately after a heavy shower, or when a fine cool morning acts as a refrigerator to the evaporation of the preceding, sultry day, or in the immediate neighbourhood of the marshes, the dew, though it does fall in all places, is scarcely perceptible, owing to the porous nature of the rock.
  Having thus briefly noticed the coincidences between the structure of the Bermudas and the coral islands of the Pacific, I will mention an instance which indicates a difference. Kotzebue says,
“ The reefs at Otdia consist principally of dark coral, which is mixed with but a little red $ at low water the rocks are visible for about two feet, which was the case when we used the stream anchor; but all was soon covered by the rising tide. We had at a small distance from it forty fathoms’ depth, but which increased a little further so much that we could find no bottom J.”
  This answers to the description of our serpuline reefs, but not of those which owe their origin to zoophytes. The observation was made by Kotzebue, and seems to have been overlooked by Chamisso. It is proper to add, although the animal of the Serpula can live for many hours out of the water, yet that of most corals, on exposure, deliquesce in a few minutes into a slimy liquid.
  The tides at Bermuda average about four feet six inches ; and at low water the serpuline reefs stand about two feet above the surface. The variations in the outside soundings, are by no means as rapid as in the South Sea coral islands.

GEOLOGICAL DETAILS OF THE PRINCIPAL ISLANDS IN GEOGRAPHICAL ORDER.
   St. George's Island.—The strata dip southward with considerable uniformity along the southern and eastern shores, which are protected from violent attacks of the sea by St. David’s, Smith’s, and Longbird islands; and by the reefs which bound the intricate passage into Murray’s Anchorage.
   The north side is exposed, throughout its whole length, tov the fury of a sea which has had, within the area of the north reef, a distance of seven or eight miles, sufficient space to reaccumulate its destructive energies; and exhibits in the cliffs the saddle or dome-shaped structure, (variously exemplified in figs. 1 and 2,) the lines of lamination dipping towards every point of the compass. In one or two instances, the summits of what were once internal hills, are bared, and within a few square yards the coats of this nucleus range round it with perfect regularity. As might be expected, this north side consists, in a great measure, of abrupt cliffs, and landslips brought down by the undermining of the waves.
   The sandstone on the summit of some of the hills, is scarcely tenacious enough to hold together ; but from Mullet Bay to the ferry, on a level of not more than twenty feet above the sea, the rock suddenly becomes a very hard, fine-grained or compact limestone, in which scarcely a vestige of organic structure is visible.
   Just above high-water mark, along a considerable portion of the south side, is a stratum of calcareous sand, about six feet thick, apparently a distinct deposit from the rock above it.
   Vertical crevices abound, filled with a substalagmitef much harder than the rock. In some places the arrangement of these cavities resembles that of veins in old slate or limestone. Where the partitions stand comparatively unimpaired by the weather, their planes constantly intersect one another, and thus form reticulations, once filled with the soft sandstone. In all cases the veins are younger than the crevices, from whatever cause these last may have originated.
St. David’s.—Like St. George’s, this island consists of a low, irregular belt of hard limestone which commences in the centre of the north side, and continues westward, through Stock’s Point, till it appears, as above noticed, at Mullet Bay.
   Cooper's Island.—Here I have remarked nothing, except the supposed cast of a tree at the south-east point. It will be referred to under the head of ‘ Organics.’
   Longbird Island—Affords an excellent horizontal section along the south side of strata, deposited in irregular undulations, and not contorted by any subsequent disturbance.
   Nonsuch, Castle, and Goat Islands.—As far as interest depends on variety, these possess but little. They, however, exhibit the frusta of the saddle-shaped structure, which may often be traced from one island to another, though frequently separated by considerable intervals.
   Bermuda, or the Main Island.—The description given of the north side of St. George’s answers in all respects to that of the whole of those coasts which are exposed to the ocean. On the south side, the sand has made several encroachments, but only at Elbow Bay, with any great success.
   This sand tract will be more minutely described under ‘ encroachments;’ but I may here remark, that wherever the rain, in effecting its escape, has scooped channels in the slope of this sand, their sides and bottom are lined with substalagmite of about one eighth of an inch thick. This is not peculiar to Elbow Bay, for, generally, wherever the sandy rock has been exposed in a hill side, it will be found coated with this incrustation.
   Westward of Hungry Bay, the rock assumes a somewhat uniform character. A stratum of sand, corresponding to that on the south side of St. George’s Island, begins to show itself at about the centre of the island, continuing thence for a few miles westward; but in both instances there seems little difference in age between these sand beds and the strata above them, as the same shell, an helix, is found in abundance at all levels.
   
   Ireland.—The position of this island is similar to that of St. George’s ; but owing to its narrowness (in one place, Cockburn’s Cut, the breadth being hardly fifty yards) there is little room for the development of the saddle-shape; although I conceive that a reference to figs. 5, 6, will show that however now truncated, it once existed.
   
   Although, as before stated, a species of helix occurs in all the strata, not merely imbedded, but filled with a hard stone, yet in this island there are six or seven marked divisions in the section, showing different deposits of red earth (fig. 5), similar to that on the surface, not only in composition, but in being deposited in the rude troughs formed by the abraded basset edges of the strata. The rock above d is uniform in structure and texture, and thus contains the best quarries ; that below it, is generally rubbly and short-grained, varying constantly from a hard limestone to loose sand; below this bed also, numerous caverns (&,) have been opened during the progress of the fortifications; and, with but very few exceptions, whenever they are perfect, they contain saltwater, having their bottom below the sea level. In every instance except one (fig. 8. p. 112), the red earth lies almost immediately on the roofs of these hollows, fig. 7. 1.
   Ireland is remarkable for having the finest quarry of building materials in the whole group. The stone of the eastern half consists of fine and coarse particles of comminuted shells or corals, hard subcrystalline limestone, and masses of corals imbedded in compact or granular limestone. The softer varieties prevail from Cockburn’s Cut, westward.
ALLUVIUM.
  All that can be noticed under this head is the black, rich, tenacious mud of the marshy districts; it has obviously much of a vegetable nature, and makes an excellent garden soil when mixed with the red earth.
  By different measurements which I have taken, the Mangrove Swamp and Salt Marsh A is on a level with B : as far as I can judge, all the others in the islands are not above the sea level. The water is almost fresh, but in summer, these ponds become stagnant and very offensive.
ENCROACHMENTS.
  Land on Sea.—The harbours and inlets of Bermuda share the same fate as those of all other places, where it is easier for the sea to introduce silt and sand in its first strength, than to withdraw it when the velocity of its waters is reduced by the obstructions of the sand-banks, rocks and reefs forming the confined and labyrinthine passages among coral groups.
   Thus at the head of Crow-lane, Bermuda or Main Island, within the memory of the present generation, ships of some burthen used to lie at wharfs, where now scarcely a large boat can repair at all tides. The same has occurred in the narrow channel between Ordnance Island and the Market-wharf at St. George’s, but to a far greater extent.
   The Flatts Inlet, entrance to Harrington Sound, is perceptibly filling, notwithstanding the benefit it receives from the Sound as a backwater.	
  Sea on Land.—There is a limit to these encroachments; for although the action of the sea is powerful enough to undermine the ordinary strata, yet when it reaches the hard calcareous rock it can proceed no further; and this stone, which I shall hereafter designate as f Base rock,’ will be found wanting under all the recent landslips; hence, with these exceptions, I know but one instance of marine encroachments. In 1801 Shelly Bay scarcely existed: what is now the mouth, was at that time a row of sand hills; and the road on the north side lay close within. Some free blacks who lived there, being in want of fuel, cut down the plants which kept these sand hills in a solid state. Being- no longer duly opposed, the sea quickly broke through, and now retains possession of the ground at least 100 yards in rear of the old road, traces of which are still visible. The Mangrove Swamp between the beach and the present road, was until then a garden.
  Sand Encroachments.—Though there are objections to the last being-termed a strictly geological fact, yet I have introduced it, and the following details of the sand flood at Elbow Bay, on account of their great utility.
   The proprietor of the principal part of the land of this bay, the venerable Captain Lightbourne, remembers an attempt about seventy years ago, when the inhabitants expected an attack from the French and Spaniards, to form a breastwork along the sand-hills, which then, as at Shelly Bay, skirted the coast. In doing so, they cut through the natural protections given by the sea-shrubs and creepers which usually abound in such places. From that day the sand, supported by constant supplies from the sea, has steadily proceeded up the hill to the very summit, a height of about 180 feet. It is, however, surprising to observe the singular state of arrest under which the invader stands before the children of the soil. A few straggling cedars,widely scattered in advance of the wood which now bounds the space, have been passed by this sand flood, yet the dazzling, dry, and almost snow-white sand is checked, before the front rank of the trees, in a steep bank, varying from ten to twenty-five feet in height, and so remarkably well defined that scarcely a particle is scattered beyond a distance of twenty yards. As soon as the mass shall have overtopped the woods, I know nothing capable of opposing its progress, as there are no streams at Bermuda to act like the little brook in St. Owen’s valley at Jersey*, which has so effectually stopped the march of the Quenodis.
   Although this inroad commenced so long ago, yet the principal advance has been since 1807, from which date about 200 yards have been gained on the eastern side. Before I left the colony in March 1833, the sand had reached the northern corner of a cottage belonging to a man called Ned Keel (on Mr. Butterfield’s estate); and the top of the bank, eight feet high, was on a level with the eaves of the shed. During the last fourteen years it has progressed, at this point, only about forty yards, in a bed from four to eight feet deep, in consequence of the repulsive action of a thin beltof cedars just below. Very near this spot also, is a small circular group of the same trees, which the sand has passed, and imbedded to the depth of from six to eight feet; but the space within has been so perfectly screened, that the bottom of this little oasis is the natural greensward.
   There is another encroachment at Tucker’s Town, said to have taken place about sixty years ago ; and has crossed the neck between Harrington’s Sound and the sea; but beyond this it does not seem inclined to move. The sand has not been stopped, at the eastern extremity of this beach, where the bluffs commence, by their very considerable declivity,—though it has been most effectually at the crest of the slope, by a natural fence of sage bush, growing partly in the soil and partly in the sand; which, as it ascended, seems to have thus rolled on with the seeds of destruction to its progress, in its own bosom.
   The same operations appear to have occurred throughout the sand tracts at and near Great Turtle Bay. Whatever scheme may hereafter be executed for the further defence of the south side, it will be well to remember the fate of Captain Lightbourne’s property ; so that if a military road be formed over such ground, to make it on the turf, and on no account to cut through it.
   Hence also, where a stream of water cannot be commanded, plantations of trees, suitable to the soil, will for a long time maintain a very efficient opposition; and though it is to be feared, that eventually they must succumb, where turf and creepers have not established themselves, still, to have effected the preservation of a district for a generation or two, cannot be considered as the attainment of a trifling object.	
  In Elbow Bay the sand contains, generally on or near the surface, layers, scales, and tubes of calcareous stone, which cannot have been many years in forming, though I have not sufficient data to determine the precise number.
   The greatest thickness of the layers is about 1^ inches ; and although found on the surface, they are not, I apprehend, produced there, but at a few feet or inches beneath. The sand on the weather side of the little saddles is constantly blowing away, and the edges of the reverse strata, or rather lamina, becoming exposed and undermined, fall down.
   An inspection of some of these slabs will prove how perfectly, recent specimens may be contained in stone which has acquired great hardness. On the beach, about 300 yards west of Roselands, the matrix was so firmly attached to slabs of sound, compact, sonorous limestone, as to be in many instances perfectly identified with them. It cost me nearly as much labour to dislodge some of these specimens as I have bestowed on greenstones. An Astrea, like A. Rotulosa, Turbo Pica, fragments of Ostrea, Spondylus, &c. &c., all contributed with the shelly sand towards the formation of this striking conglomerate.
   Other blocks of coral reef may be found, imbedded in the rock on the south side. There is one in particular 300 yards east of Elbow Bay, about ten yards from the water’s edge, and four or five feet above it; at some points this block is quite assimilated with the matrix, but at others, stands out in relief, in consequence of its greater durability.
   The calcareous tubes are very generally found throughout the islands, apparently aggregated around grass or small roots, as nuclei, which have subsequently decayed. They have almost always an earthy matter running down the axis. Beds, nay strata of these tubular deposits, may be found in various parts, as in the neighbourhood of Tobacco Bay near St. George’s, and in the bank a little to the westward of Harris’s Bay, where the cliffs commence; though nowhere to such an extent as at Ireland Island, between Bombay and the south-west point, where the stratum is about four feet thick, and corresponds to a similar formation on Skinner’s or Tate’s Island.
   The cliffs to the westward of Elbow Bay are curiously perforated to a great extent by similar tubular holes; but there they are detached from each other, and are generally vertical and much larger.
ORGANICS.
  The whole of the Bermudas, and perhaps many of the older rocks, may be called Organic Formations,” as they present but one mass of animal remains, in various stages of comminution and disintegration. From the most compact rock to the very sand of the shore, the materials are universally fragments of shells, corals, &c. &c. Of the former the Fenus Pennsylvanica is the most abundant, being found in every part of the colony, more especially among the newer aggregates on the coast; and in every state, from the perfect specimen to the smallest particle. A stratum of these, in indifferent preservation, is in the quarry whence the stone for the pier at St. George’s ferry was obtained. This bed, however, is of trifling extent compared with an apparently corresponding one in the chain of islets reaching across the mouth of Crow-lane Harbour, beginning near Phyllis’ Island, and continuing thence through every point in the line till it reaches Harris’s Island : it is about five feet thick and lies about six feet above the water.
  In the chain above-mentioned I have obtained excellent specimens of the Scutella Quinqueforis, having the pores of the crust filled with crystallized carbonate of lime; like the Echinites occasionally found similarly circumstanced in the European chalk.
  The Turbo Pica is very abundant, with the nacre and colours; but like the Venus Pennsylvanica, it is chiefly met with in sand-pits, and more recent formations, though without the slightest reference to the hardness of the stone containing it. It seemed difficult at first to account for these large shells (Turbo Pica) being found on heights, where, from their weight, it was impossible to suppose they had been carried by the wind; but a solution may be found in the habits of the Soldier Crab, which, on more than one occasion, I have seen running about in these shells.
   The most interesting organics with which I have met, were in the rock now inclosed by the North Bastion, at Ireland Island.
   Whilst cutting the escarp of this work, a large block of reef was discovered in the solid rock, fifteen or twenty feet from the surface, and at about four feet above high water. This specimen contained Mceandrina areolata, the common Mytilus of the coast, retaining its black colour, and a pink Millepore very common in the serpuline reefs. This spot, conceiving the truncated strata of Ireland to be restored to their proper form, must have been at the very apex of the saddle, and is perfectly distinct from the loose, soft, and newer sandstones. Above the level of this spot, lie the strata a a, fig. 8, which for some hundred yards along the north side, consist chiefly of a hard subcrystalline limestone.
   Although this stone is by no means as subcrystalline as the transition, or other old limestones, yet it is sufficiently so to show that the structure can be attained by very new rocks, and by other means than that of heat under pressure. Had heat been in anywise applied to such extent, it is more than probable much of the carbonaceous matter (one of the constituents of the shelly sand) would have been altogether evolved, and would not have remained, black and mixed amongst the particles of the rock. At all events the colours of the Mytilus and Millepora could not possibly have been retained.
Fig. 8.
   In the centre of this rock, fig. 8, was a cavern ; and entangled amongst the stalagmitic lining (as well as in that of other caves and crevices), or else lying in heaps in the loose red earth within, we found abundance of a large and delicate Helix. In another instance, upwards of thirty bushels were discovered, without any earth among them : a circumstance easily accounted for by the common habit of these animals to shelter in holes, wherever they can find them.
   I have never seen these creatures alive, nor have I ever heard of their having been seen in that state; but still they were found with a smaller Helix deep in the compact rock at e, fig. 5. This Helix, which is the common, living snail of the island, I obtained in the hardest stone, and in the loosest sand; sometimes lined with druses of carbonate of lime, sometimes filled with a solid cast, at other times slightly cemented together, and frequently retaining some colour; in which condition they are generally found, as before mentioned, in every part of the colony.
   Returning to the cavern at the North Bastion (fig. 8.). In the heap of red earth, which in this instance only had rather an unctuous feel, mixed with the large Helix, were found quantities of birds’ bones. From the best accounts, the caves at Ireland were frequented until lately by a sea bird, whose local name, derived from its peculiar cry, is Pim-li-co. In hazy weather, or at night, this sound was always a warning for vessels from the West Indies to put about, and avoid the perilous south-west bar and reefs; but since the establishment of the dockyard at Ireland, these birds have almost left the Bermudas.
   Whilst excavating a ditch near the cavern b shown in fig. 5, p. 108, a small hole was discovered in a rather hard rock, composed of comminuted fragments, with the interstices not filled up; it was about twenty feet above the sea, thirty yards from it, and fifteen feet from the top of the hill, but without any apparent connection with the surface. In this hole were found an eggshell and many fragments of bones, similar to the preceding, but they were all, as well as the egg, coated with carbonate of lime.
   Ireland is however by no means the exclusive mine for these fossils. Bones, apparently those of birds, have been found in the limestone on the coast of Harrington Sound by Mr. Hill, to whom I am indebted for the information. He obtained specimens fifty feet from the water, twenty feet above it, and four feet under the surface. Three eggs were found close to the bones, and similarly imbedded. Another egg was found in a block of limestone near Hamilton.
   A gold knee buckle and a canister shot were dug up in a coarse limestone, whilst excavating the foundations for one part of the North Bastion, across the bottom of the cavern : they were accompanied by Scutella Quinqueforis, containing crystallized carbonate of lime as before, and Agar'icia undata. This rock, a genuine coral rag, is three or four feet thick, and is evidently in a progressive state of consolidation. As it was under water, and as we constantly find stalagmite in the caverns similarly situated, it seems that evaporation, however conducive to the compactness of strata, and the depositing lime once held in solution, is by no means a necessary requisite.
   Turtle bones were also procured from the North Bastion coral rag, and from the sands at Elbow Bay. The turtles seem, like the poor bird before mentioned, to have been buried while depositing its eggs, as the two skeletons when first discovered were entire and undisturbed. Their dimensions were nine feet in length, and seven in breadth, as I was informed by an eye-witness.
   These bones, as well as those of birds from the North Bastion, Harrington Sound, and the ditch near l, fig. 5, all adhere strongly to the tongue; hence no further reliance can be placed on this circumstance as a criterion of age. Nor can crystallization or compactness be considered unequivocal testimony, in arriving at conclusions respecting the age of a rock.
   In the North Bastion, in the interior crevices of the coral rock, were many fine specimens of Cypraea and Bulla, but with abraded surfaces.
      The last individual Animal Organic which I shall mention, is a Strombus which I chiselled out at Long-bird Island, and had the cavities in the substance of the shell filled with crystallized carbonate of lime. I may terminate this list comprehensively by saying, that almost every shell now known in the surrounding sea, may be found in the rock quite perfect, except with regard to colour, especially among the newer beds on the sea coast.
  Chalk.—It may be considered rather a bold step to place this mineral under the head of f Organics/ but from all that I have seen during different examinations of decomposing zoophytes and shells, from the least calcareous to the large and massive Maeandrina and Astrea, not only whilst breaking or cutting them with my own hands, but as obtained from the extensive excavations made by the dockyard diving-bells for the foundations of the wharfs, and from the soil torn up by large mooring anchors, I have no more hesitation in attributing: the existence of the Bermuda chalk to such a source, than I have for asserting that the obvious material of the Bermuda stone is derived from the same origin ; with, however, this difference, that in the latter instance the fragments are the result of mechanical subdivision ; while in the former, the elementary particles are due to the decay, by long submersion, of the membranous tissue*, which, pervading their whole structure, releases the constituent calcareous matter dispersed through the texture, when it is ruined by decomposition. These animals, and the many marine plants, consisting chiefly of lime, produce this chalk, just as terrestrial animals and vegetables give carbon to soil when they decay. I no more pretend to argue that the European chalk was thus produced, than that the caverns of all the various limestones were formed by means similar to those which excavated the caves at Bermuda (see page 119); or that the coral rag of the oolites is related to that of the North Bastion; but certainly the external and the chemical peculiarities are as much the same as their common character of being marine deposits.
   This chalk, as found in the harbour bottom, is much mixed with shell-sand, corals of many sorts, shells in a perfect state, and gigantic masses of equally perfect Astrea and Maeandrina, as well as in every stage of decay, leaving no doubt of their having lived and perished where they are found. The aspect of this chalk when fresh, is precisely that of crude mortar. A variety, which may be termed stalactitic, was found in some of the newly opened caves, and resembled curds in consistency!. In some cases it occurs in small shapeless deposits among the regular strata, or lining the crevices and insides of caverns. This variety, when dry, consists of very fine white powder, which yields to the least pressure and soils the fingers.
      The surface of the calcareous sandstones, is, in some places, coated by compact stalagmite, and I believe a strong resemblance, if not identity, will be found between its nature and the hard chalk near the basaltic districts of Antrim, the solidifying of which has been attributed to fire. This inference may be true; but here is a clear fact, that such limestone can be otherwise produced. Not that the conclusions from Sir J. Hall’s most interesting experiments are the less valid, countenanced as they are by the results of the action of Trap and Whin on the immediately contiguous strata. Such a mode of consolidation, however, is not perhaps so likely to occur on an extended scale, or to produce such regular strata, as that which has formed the Bermuda stone. It is, moreover, an additional means of arriving at certainty, to allow every known force its fair consideration.

   Vegetable Organics.—These are doubtful. Fig. 9 is however a sketch and section of certain rudely-shaped cylindrical blocks which are to be found on every part of the surface of Bermuda, though I never heard of their being discovered below it. They are very frequently arranged in groups of from twenty to fifty, as if they had once been the roots of as many trees. Fig. 10, c, d, are plan and section of the recent Palmetto root, which has, in common with the subject under consideration, a very marked socket, or deep cup*. When this tree dies, it generally falls out of the cup, of which excellent examples may be seen at low water in Shelly Bay, north of Harrington Sound, Bermuda. It is the general surmise that these curious cylinders (fig. 8) are the remains of the Palmetto. I think it very likely that they belong to a member of the family of Palms; though I have my doubts as to the Palmetto being the individual, as the internal surface of its root socket is entirely composed of the ends of the nearly straight and tubular roots, about one-fifth of an inch in diameter, which diverge into the ground as so many radii. Now in the supposed organics, in the inside of the cup, although smooth, I never could detect these ends of the radicles; and there is too much irregularity to allow me to join in the received opinion without hesitation ; though nothing like any other description of palm relics has been yet discovered.
REEFS.
  The notices relative to these structures, which I at first intended for this paper, have so exceeded it in bulk, that they are reserved for a separate essay. I merely remark that there are two distinct kinds ; those formed by Serpula, and those by Zoophytes of all descriptions, which construct calcareous skeletons.
  Figs. 11, 12, and 13, exhibit such plans, sections, and views as will suffice to illustrate their leading peculiarities, especially one that is common to both varieties, that of forming a belt round any obstacle which offers a rallying point; whether such centre be the head of a rock, or the base of a mountain.

   External Evidences.—Pig-. 2, Plate VI. illustrates the true forms of the ground taken at points in the islands without any especial selection. The lines are surveys of horizontal contours, traced by a spirit level, at given heights. An eye accustomed to such topographical considerations, will, I think, recognise a similarity to the results which in other parts of the world have been referred to the sweeping action of a huge body of water.
   I cannot but suppose that such singular lines of islets, as those terminating Long-bird island, those in Crow-lane Harbour, the ‘ Stags,’ near Crawl Point, &c., are most naturally accounted for by the exertion of such a force; as the strata in these little spots are nearly always horizontal, and evidently frusta of a more extensive formation.
   It has just been stated, that reefs generally collect close, and parallel to any shore as a nucleus. Throughout the whole extent of the south side of the group, there is exactly such a general conformity to the shore in the Serpuline reefs, which, nevertheless, vary in their distance from it, between fifty and five hundred yards. Its contour-like resemblance (Map, Plate VI.) to a former coast line is very striking, especially when the numerous coincidences are duly considered between the present positions of its fragments, and those of the more or less truncated hills along the sea side ; at the original foot of which they would generally lie, were the slopes of the ground restored.
   Such circumstances can however yield only probable evidence. To convert them into positive testimony we should require that points of hard persistent rock should appear through this reef at such irregular distances as would be suggested by the variable density of the Bermuda stone; and we might likewise expect that, occasionally, the summits of these peaks should exhibit a stratified appearance.
   We have abundance of such witnesses in what are called ‘ Boilers,’ ‘ Breakers,’ &c., or rock heads, which have served as points of aggregation to the reefs around them. Such are the Boilers on the continuation of the line of the point, at the west end of Great Turtle Bay; those in the centre of Common Landing Bay; the long and dangerous chain of about thirty sunken rocks, between the Bear Boiler and the South-West Breaker; the ‘ Stags,’ between Ireland island and Spanish Point, &c. &c. From accounts received, I have reason to suppose that such are to be found all round the North Reef; but at one place I am certain of it, the ‘ North Rock,’ or as the old French maps used to call it, “ La petite Bermudaand it is to be observed that the highest pinnacle bears the ultimatum of the desired evidence of ‘ Diluvial Agency,’ a stratified summit, as pointed out to me by the keener eye of my late brother officer, Lieut. Browne, R.E.
   This monument to departed strata, stands in a Serpuline reef, which is as usual tabular, and appears above low water. The largest rock is about sixteen feet high ; and like all those which have withstood the onset of the Atlantic, is composed of “ base rock.”
   Internal Evidence.—Ireland is the only place, as far as I am aware of, which has supplied such arguments; the deposits of red earth in fig. 5, contain stones that would have been too heavy for the wind to have moved without utterly dispersing every grain of the soil containing them. From the number of these deposits, we are warranted to conclude, that five or six such catastrophes have befallen these islands; though the organics establish clearly enough, that as delicate land shells, they and the strata in which they are imbedded could never have been produced under water; and if a rock in the heart of an island, and at its lowest point, presents animal remains possessing even colour and membranous tissue, with a considerable degree of perfection ; the superincumbent masses cannot boast of any great claims to antiquity; hence the expression ‘ Diluvial Agency,’ as the heading of this section must not be restricted to the Noachian deluge, but to the repetition of several probably subsequent, local ones, and the results of distant volcanic action.
CAVERNS AND PINNACLES.
  The caverns are numerous, and many of them very beautiful. The largest, and, geologically speaking, the most instructive, is Basset’s, near Somerset- bridge. It is said to extend for more than a mile; but the first few hundred yards of toilsome progress usually satisfies the curiosity of the majority of its visitors. It seems to be comparatively recent, from the fresh state of its surfaces, and the small quantity of stalactite observable; this absence of incrustation, however, renders the origin of this cavern very palpable; namely, the undermining of the substrata by the sea, the waters of which lie in pools at the bottom. Hence we may consider such caverns as hollows produced by internal landslips; from the most normal of which, to the simplest niche, there is every intermediate point of transition. The north side of the Main island is to a remarkable degree indented with these recesses ; and when they occur in more sheltered places, are sure to be rich fields for the naturalist.
  Fig'. 8 (p. 112) exhibiting the section of the cavern which once existed under the North Bastion, and Fig. 14 a section of the ground and its caves near the Magazine Pond at Ireland, are I apprehend sufficient to explain my views respecting the origin of these phenomena, as far as Bermuda is concerned.
   The caves at Walsingham, near the Ferry, are well worth examination, but in point of speculative interest, they are inferior to the many and very singular hollows near them, on the neck of land separating Harrington Sound from Castle Harbour; respecting which, all that 1 can venture to surmise from their sections, their steep and occasionally overhanging sides coated with stalagmite, is, that they are the remains of former caverns, laid bare by diluvial action. Vertical sections of caves are common enough in the cliffs, Fig. 5, c; and oblique sections (such as that so well known, close to the Ferry, between St. George’s and Hamilton) are not unfrequent on hill sides.
   Tucker’s Island cavern was a perfect bijou; with one splendid exception it has hitherto stood unrivalled amongst the caves of Bermuda.
   This little cavern shown in fig. 5, b, had a length of eighty feet, a breadth of about fifty, a height above the little lake within of at most fifteen, and a depth below its surface scarcely exceeding fourteen. The stalactites were remarkably clear and beautiful, varying from the massive pendent of six or seven feet in length, to the slender incipient fragile tube, which crumbled at the slightest touch. It was a scene not to be readily forgotten, when we launched a little boat into the miner’s first and narrow opening, through which the sun shone strongly, and reflecting its light from the face of the water upwards and with power to the sparry fretted ceiling of the vault, illuminated it in a way which can only be appreciated by those who have been eye witnesses of such effects. This cave was shortly afterwards destroyed, as interfering with the safety of the works.
  The irregular density of the rock is exhibited on all scales, from minute flaws and patches to large masses of dry sand ; which more than once occurred during the progress of our excavations, in the heart of otherwise hard, sound rock. Fig. 15 is a sketch of one of these hollows; and whatever may be the scale of operation, it is just such a form as would have been left had the sea extracted its contents.
   To the unequal distribution of that carbonate of lime in solution, which forms ordinary rock on the upper parts of a section; or druses and breccias, as it filters through the strata of red earth to the lower beds or to the caverns where it crystallizes as stalagmite and stalactite, I attribute, not only the caverns and sandflaws, but the pinnacled rocks almost equally common in the islands. The most remarkable groups are at Tobacco Bay, St. George’s Island (fig. 1G), and at the North rock. I cannot but consider these as merely blocks, sufficiently impregnated with the dissolved carbonate of lime to have resisted the attacks of the waters, with the same success as the ‘Base rock.’
   I apprehend that such caverns as those described in the preceding pages, are rarely found in any but calcareous rocks. The Grotto of Antiparos ; the caves of Torquay, Chudleigh, Plymouth, and Kirkby, as famous for their organic remains, as those of Gaylenreuth and others, in Germany ; the various caverns in Derbyshire; Peter Frazer’s Bear Den, near Picton, in Nova Scotia; the different subterraneous courses of certain rivers in England, &c. &c. ; are all found in limestones of various formations. It is almost trite to quote such instances to the general geologist; but I have thus reassembled them, to show how well the series is terminated by the corresponding examples, which have supplied the materials of this section.
WATER.
   Fresh water may be had in nearly all parts of the islands,, provided the bottom of the well is not sunk under the level of low tide. Generally speaking1, it is deemed prudent to be contented with twelve or eighteen inches of water, rather than incur the risk of rendering the well brackish ; since, from the porous nature of the rock, the salt water always filtrates through.
   At the naval wells below Mr. Langton’s, where large quantities of water are required for shipping, it is only taken between the half flood and half ebb, to avoid the brackish quality of water drawn at improper seasons; for all the wells, on the sea coast, are affected by the tide; and more or less so those at a distance from it.

BUILDING MATERIALS.
   The Bermuda rock is much whiter than the ‘Bath stone.’ Blocks of any ordinary size and strength can be obtained. The softer kinds, weighing at an average about ninety-five pounds per cubic foot, with a cohesive strength equal to only a quarter that of brick, are quite strong enough for house walls, where no great skill is required from the stone-mason. The houses are in general roofed with thin slabs of this material, which admit rain unless secured by proper washes.
   The harder sorts, like those of which the eastern half of Ireland Island is composed, vary in specific gravity from 1600 to 2560. In raising these, powder must be employed; and the usual tools for hard stone, in their conversion into ashler. In large masses, such as escarps, wharf walls, &c., it generally answers tolerably well; but it scarcely deserves a very high reputation, from the cracks which the unequal composition of the stone occasions, when under very heavy pressure.
   It is too pure to afford a good lime for external purposes, as it takes a long time to harden in thick walls. Equally good lime is manufactured from all descriptions of stone found in the island, regulating the choice by such localities as determine the economy of the burning process.
THE BAHAMAS.
   Judging by hand specimens, from such reports as I have been able to collect, from their form as given by the best maps, and their position with reference to the gulf of Mexico, I think it highly probable, that the Bahamas were produced by the same causes as those to which the Bermudas owe their existence.
   I have been told on respectable authority, that the red earth is to be found on the coasts of Florida. I have also seen specimens of Menacchinite from the shores of Virginia.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
   Amongst the different speculations on the origin of coral groups, none are more common than such as would effect the whole by plutonic action; but I can see no proof that the islands, though once formed beneath the surface of the sea, were suddenly and subsequently elevated. The peculiar arrangements of the strata, both in the mass and detail, and the constant occurrence of the Helix, appear to be conclusive against the above theory; and if dislocations of strata do occur, in only one instance (fig. 13, p. 118) are they to be met with to an extent like those, which I have seen in the chalk near Dover, and at Alum Bay, and due to undermining of the strata.
   In most notices on the Sunderbunds, it is stated, that islands are rapidly formed around any nucleus, such as the trunk of a tree in the bottom of the river, &c., which, reducing the velocity of the current, affords it the opportunity of depositing the sand ; and this procedure must necessarily be of universal occurrence under similar circumstances.
   Once thrown down,, unless carried off by a more powerful action than the original one, every fresh layer of sand not only increases the obstacle, but likewise the tendency to arrest the passing materials, until such time as a limit is attained by the increased, and consequently destructive velocity of the current in the thus narrowed channel.
   Assuming then any such initiative, as the head of a rock at the bottom of a sea in which enormous districts of zoophytes, &c., abound, as between 32° or 34° on each side of the equator, and from which dead portions to a considerable amount are incessantly torn off, and moved on with the waters until stopped by the rock, there will then follow the continued operation of the preceding law, of which this is the commencement.
   Zoophytes and other marine animals, of which the germs are passing on with other matters, attach themselves, as my own observations enable me to assert, indifferently to the first base they can find; and by their growth, reproduction, and death, add to the stability and bulk of the colony. In this manner, I conceive submarine mountains are constructed, and around their summits, the coral reefs.
   If the tides have their usual action and alternate direction, then the necessary form assumed by such a bank, will be like that of the average of sand banks and coral groups, elongate, and more or less ovate.
   Such germs as are dispersed in the water, on touching the bank, will on the whole collect in greater quantities on the declivities of the edges than on the plateau of the upper surface, over which they are far more likely to float away. Most zoophytes affect a vertical growth, and in this attitude have a tendency to add to the accumulations of the exterior fence, to the prejudice of the space circumscribed.
   Hence, I would surmise, is their generally annular form; and as to their somewhat uniformly level upper edges, that is of course regulated by the surface of the tides, above which the animals cannot for any length of time exist.
   The Bahamas lie in the bight of the gulf-stream, and the Bermudas on its outskirts; whether this is, or is not, the immediate parent of these groups, if we admit the above premises, then once above water, the wind is sufficient to complete districts of indefinite extent; and far larger than those which have formed the subject of this Memoir.
   Although the stone has been described as forming rapidly at Elbow Bay, I can scarcely imagine the probable depth to which such accumulations are likely to be consolidated. As a tolerably general rule, the upper strata are less compact throughout the Islands than the lower ones; but there is a contradiction to this, not only in the large and deep sound cliff from which our works at Ireland are supplied, where the bottom is as soft as the top, but in the still more remarkable instances afforded by the beds of sand, mentioned at pages 106 and 107, as lying just above high water along much of the south sides of St. George’s, and of the Main island. These sand beds lie under cliffs of good rock, sometimes fifty feet high. Why has not the rain water deposited the lime which it cannot but have dissolved in its passage amongst these beds ?
   I had a tube, two inches square inside, and six feet long, filled with sand, suspended vertically from a shelf. For two years water was kept dripping on the upper end, with no greater interruptions than those which might have occurred from an occasional want of rain ; but on opening the tube at the end of that period there was not the slightest appearance of cohesion amongst the particles of sand. Want of opportunity for the water to evaporate through the sides might account for this; but such heavy exceptions to an extensively applied general rule, like that regulating the consolidation of the Bermuda rock, are very embarrassing.


