The most trivial notes on any branch of Natural History are always so acceptable to myself, that I am perhaps too confident in supposing that my own careless memoranda may be pleasing to others. On the 28th of last June I landed at Newry, and, with knapsack on back, marched off in a northerly direction, to see with my own eyes a country of which Englishmen in general know something less than of Kamkatcha or South Australia. From Belfast to Fairhead I coasted the county of Antrim, with the exception of a few miles ; and although I found nothing particularly striking, yet the fine sea-views, commanding the coast of Scotland, the Isles of Arran, Bute, Jura, Islay, &c, and the singular Ailsa Craig, amply repay the pedestrian for his time. Fairhead is really grand ; the basalt is irregularly columnar, quite perpendicular, and of great height: during the lapse of ages it seems 
gradually to have given way, vast disrupted masses being crowded and jammed together below the cliff, in wild and wonderful confusion. The height of the cliff is about 650 feet above the sea ; of this, a portion measuring perhaps 300 feet is perfectly perpendicular, the remainder is a mass of fragments decreasing in height till it reaches the sea. 

On this cliff I first saw the red-legged crow, and watched it feeding its young in the fissures of the inaccessible precipice : compared with our crow, rook, or j ackdaw, it is a graceful bird; its flight is easy and elegant, and its gait, when perched, very pleasing. The hooded crow and raven are also abundant here, and the latter wonderfully familiar. Ferns were abundant; Asplenium marinum occurs in profusion, and grows to a large size, but the fronds of the present year were very immature, and those of last season beginning to decay. In the basaltic cliff is a remarkable fissure, across which a mass has fallen and forms a natural bridge ; through this fissure is a foot-way called the ' Grey Man's Path,' leading under the bridge to the top of the cliff; this path is literally " strewed with flowers," and among them the beautiful Papaver Cambricum was very conspicuous and abundant. 

The singular little island of Carrick-a-Rede, its flexible bridge of ropes, and the neighbouring sea-caves roofed with Asplenium marinum, are well worth a visit; and so is the Giant's Causeway a few miles to the westward, for of a surety it is most curious, but when the terms "stupendous," "gigantic," "sublime," &c. are given to this curiosity, they are certainly misapplied. When the guides first tell him " that is the Causeway," and point to a low, brown, tame-looking, sea-beach, the most phlegmatic man in the world must inevitably feel disappointed ; but as he walks onwards and finds that he is treading on the tops of basaltic pillars, of various but regular figures, triangles, squares, pentagons, hexagons, and heptagons, he cannot but be struck with the curiosity of the affair. Compared with Staffa, the Giant's Causeway is so insignificant that I am persuaded that were it on the beach of that magnificent basaltic island, it would never have been noticed up to the present hour. The guides here are a great and insuperable annoyance, and their name is Legion ; they are of no use whatever, and by what title they hold the right of worrying strangers I am quite at a loss to ascertain. 

Donegal is a fine county for the naturalist ; here are vast and unbroken tracts of mountains, and here man, that is, civilized man, has rarely set his foot. The bog is covered with the common ling [Calluna vulgaris), and a variety of Carices and coarse sour grasses ; a few scattered sheep, and an occasional flock of twenty or thirty white goats, may here and there be seen wandering over the boggy waste. You scarcely ever see a tree, although the bog contains the remains of the trees of former ages. The abundant and almost universal occurrence of the remains of vast timber-trees in the wastes of Scotland and Ireland, where trees are now almost as rare as churches, and where indeed they can scarcely be coaxed to grow at all, has never yet been satisfactorily explained. A favourite theory on this subject is, that in time of war the forests were cleared, lest they should form a shelter in cases of pursuit : a second theory is, that copper and lead ore were conveyed from Cornwall and Wales to the coast of Ireland, in order to be smelted, and that whole forests were levelled for the supply of fuel. The fragments of trees remaining appear to be preserved by the bog, and to have suffered little or nothing from the action of moisture. The recent timber must not be confounded with the trunks often found still lower in the bog, and which are fairly entitled to rank as bog fossils, being evidently coeval with the bones of the extinct Irish elks and cattle. The more recent timber is mostly oak and 
Scotch fir. 

The north-western extremity of the county Donegal is wild, grand, and mountainous ; the summits are very lofty, white, and perfectly without vegetation. Having selected Arrigal as the highest peak, I made the ascent, which is by no means difficult, a good road having been cut along its shoulder, and passing within a thousand perpendicular feet of its summit. 
The summit is a sharp crescent-shaped ridge ; the descent on the inside of the crescent is very precipitous and remarkably barren : the form of the mountain is what is usually termed volcanic, and deep within the vast excavation which may be regarded as analogous to a crater, is a still lake. The view is very fine ; the lakes, mountain -peaks, sea-bays and islands being almost innumerable. The base of the mountains of this district is boggy and very rough, higher up is a belt of heath, and above this is the region of bare stone. 

After sleeping in a hut at the foot of Arrigal I turned southward, crossing the Glendoan mountains, and so reached Docharty bridge. The Glendoan chain is of less height, and the summits more rounded : you may often walk forty or fifty yards on an unbroken slab of stone, perfectly bare, and bleached by the action of wind and rain. On reaching the lower country about Docharty Bridge, Osmunda regalis appears in profusion, sometimes fringing the margin of the streams like a continuous hedge, sometimes rising from the bog in large isolated bushes. I could not but contrast the fem productions of this wild county with those of Argyleshire and Caernarvonshire, which in their desolate mountainous character are somewhat similar. Cryptogramma crispa is nowhere to be seen ; of Polypodium Phegopteris and Dryopteris I did not find a single frond ; and of Aspidium Oreop- 
teris, the most common fern of the Scotch and Welch mountains, I saw a tolerable sprinkling near Milroy Bay, and one single plant at Docharty Bridge ; in the mountain tract between these localities it does not once occur. In the mountain lakes Isoetes is not uncommon. Athyrium Jilix-fcemina is ubiquitous ; Nephrodium filix-mas comparatively rare : Nephr. dllatatum is common, and of three distinct types of form ; — the first elongate, broad, drooping, and nearly flat ; the second short, rigid, erect, brownish green, and convex ; the third short, less rigid and erect, bright pale green, and concave, not simply as a frond, but every pinna and pinnule also concave. The second form I believe to be Aspidium dumetorum of Smith ; the third is the Asp. dumetorum of Mackay, the Asp. dilatatum var. concavum of Babington, and the Asp. spinulosum of the Botanic Garden at Belfast, &c. 
This form is far more distinct and constant than any variety we possess in England, where the plant is confined pretty much to the first form mentioned above ; every botanist selecting one or two fronds broader or narrower, longer or shorter, larger or smaller, more rigid or more pendulous than the rest, and naming them Aspidium spinulosum or (happy deception ! ) Asp. rigidum. 

On the ruins of Castle O'Donnel I found a number of the commoner ferns, and among them a few fronds of Scolopendrium vulgare. On the banks of Lough Derg, Osmunda regalis again made its appearance in abundance. It was late in the evening when I reached this celebrated lake, and crossed to its wonder-working island, on which hundreds of invalids, and cripples, and sinners, were patiently awaiting miraculous cures for body and mind. This little island is built to the water's edge, and a solitary sycamore is the only tree it nourishes. I passed through Pettigoe, along the east side of Loch Erne, and between the upper and lower lough to Inniskillin and Manorhamilton. In approaching Sligo the country assumed a different appearance to any I had before seen ; the hills had rounded summits and rocky precipitous sides. The number and variety of ferns here greatly increased; Cystopteris fragilis was most abundant and polymorphous, as it ever is when once established in a congenial habitat. — 
Scolopendrium vulgare hung its bright green streamers from the rocks, and filled the hedge-rows, for near Sligo there are hedge-rows. Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum, Rut a-mur aria, and Trichomanes were everywhere abundant, more particularly on the stone walls. 

At Ballisodare is a very fine rapid of the Owenbeg. This stream is of respectable width, and roars, foams, and dashes along over a slaty-looking bottom in fine style : the rapid is, properly speaking, a succession of falls; the bed of the river seems to be broken into a series of unequal steps, ceasing only when its waters mingle with those of the Atlantic. I was told that great numbers of salmon annually amuse themselves by leaping at these falls, and that some sunnount them all ; the majority however find the labour too severe, and are carried back to the sea, or captured, bruised and exhausted, on the shelves of rock. From Ballisodare to Ballina the road is over a dreary bog, and without interest ; thence to Crossmolina its character is the same, but here I left the usual track, and, rounding the base of the huge Slieve Nephin, found a way to Newport. Below Nephin is a finely- wooded bog; there appeared to be nothing like cultivation, and the wood seems quite a natural one. Newport is a miserable place ; the traveller will find no rest there. It is the only town I had ever entered in which I could find no inn, but here there is none at all ; some twenty or thirty filthy spirit-shops, but nothing like an inn. 

The next morning there was a wind blowing against which it was all but impossible to stand ; it blew clouds of spray off the surface of the river : however I was early on my way, skirting Clew Bay, and gazing on its innumerable islands. — - I would fain have gathered some information about these beautiful spots of verdure ; but alas ! everything here is to be received with hesitation. The number of islands is variously stated by almost every one you meet, but the favourite number is three hundred and sixty-five — one for every day in the year, a number corresponding precisely with the lakes of Glengariff. Of these islands one hundred and seventy are well cultivated and inhabited. Looking over this wilderness of isles, Croagh Patrick fills up the horizon, its summit hidden in the clouds. On the banks of Clew Bay I found Erica Mediterranea in the greatest abundance ; I first saw it close to the road, after passing the little village of Molyrhany, — a cluster of some dozen or eighteen cabins, and from this spot as you enter Coraan Achill it is scattered in profusion over hundreds of acres : I speak of the heath known at present by our botanists as E7'ica Mediterranean but I have heard many doubts expressed as to the propriety of this name, and from what I could gather I am inclined to believe that this heath will turn out an undescribed species. In walking among this heath I found it, on the average, up to my shoulders in height, some rather higher, and a good deal much lower. Below the heath the bog was thickly sprinkled with Pinguicula Lusitanica. 

At Achill Sound there is an inn lately erected, and here a ferry-boat takes you across to the island of Achill. The sea was very rough, the raft had broken adrift with the violence of the waves, and the people said it was " too severe " to attempt the passage. However, there appeared nothing worth waiting for, so, after talking a good bit, the raft was obtained, but directly I was on board a wave gave it a cant, and T unfortunately lost my centre of gravity, fell against a seat, and in an instant lay sprawling on the bottom, having scarified one shin in performing the summerset. I mention this, as a hint to future pedestrians, because the wound was a constant walking-companion the rest of my journey, and a considerable drawback to its pleasure. At night I reached " the Settlement," an establishment for the purpose of inducing the natives to renounce the doctrines of the Church of Rome for those of the Church of England. 

The island of Achill is more like a foreign land than any I have visited ; the natives reside in huts, which a good deal resemble those of the Esquimaux Indians ; they are without chimneys or windows, and the roof seems continuous with the walls : the interior is generally undivided, and is tenanted by men, women, children, pigs and poultry, and often goats and cows. These little cabins or huts are built in what may be called loose clusters, varying from twenty to eighty in a cluster ; these clusters or villages are sixteen in number, some of them are summer residences only, and are entirely deserted in the winter; — others winter residences only, and deserted in the summer. The island of Achill is very mountainous : it rises principally towards the west, where it attains a great elevation, and then falls perpendicularly to the sea : it seems like a remote corner of some vast continent, which has sunk for ever beneath the waves : its soil, like that of the greater part of the west of Ireland, is bog, or, as it is termed, turf, and this is covered with heath and sedge, intermixed here and there with a fine velvety turf. The inhabitants possess a good number of cows, sheep, and goats ; the latter are almost invariably white, and ramble the mountains in large flocks. The heaths are Calluna vulgaris, Erica cinerea and Tetralix, of all which I found beautiful white varieties. Sedum anglicum occurs in great abundance on the rocks, and Anagallis tenella forms, in many places, a pink turf, so profusely does it flower. 

In birds the island appears to be poor ; it is doubtless visited by a variety of sea birds, but I saw nothing but gulls and terns. Eagles are very abundant, particularly (perhaps exclusively) Aquila albicilla : and of hawks I saw several species. The red-legged crow breeds in the cliffs; and I found a colony of this bird in a look-out station, built when our government was afflicted with the Napoleonphobia, but now a mass of ruins : these birds did not seem abundant. — Curlews appeared to be breeding here ; their whistle was incessant, and the old ones would constantly rise before me, and counterfeit inability to fly, as if desirous of enticing me away from their nests or young. 

The first morning after my arrival in Achill, I walked over the cliffs at Cim to Achill-head. The cliffs at Cim are said to be more than 1000 feet in perpendicular height; Achillhead, the extreme western point, is much lower, I should fancy less than 500 feet: but turning thence northward, I reached the summit of Slieve Croaghan, a height more than double that of Cim, and sliced down perpendicularly to the Atlantic. 
I imagine this cliff has never been measured ; it was variously stated to me at 2000, 2300, and 2600 feet : I am not competent to form an accurate opinion of its height, but as I lay quietly looking over it, I could not hear the huge waves of the Atlantic, as they broke in foam along its base. This might arise in part from the roaring sound of the wind among the rocks around me, or even from the wind sweeping away the sound of the waves in some other direction ; but it gave an idea of vast depth that I never before realized. From this point I coasted the north of the island, and found near the margin of the cliff a beautiful little fresh-water lake, surrounded by an amphitheatre of hills. I should think its surface was 600 feet above the sea, and its distance from the edge of the cliff scarcely 300. I doubt whether any Englishman but myself has ever seen this lone and beautiful sheet of water ; 
its singularly round form, the depth of the basin in which it reposes, the precipitous sides of that basin, its height above the sea, — all these are characters of no ordinary interest. As it was not yet evening, and the weather very fine, I ascended Slieve Mor on my way to the Settlement, an operation of an hour and a half, in order to see the sun set in the ocean from that elevated point. It was a glorious sight, but when he was gone night came on almost immediately, and I had to find my way to the Settlement after nightfall, in a country to which I was an utter stranger, where there was no track, and no tree, house, or any other object to mark the way. 

The next day I walked along the top of the cliff southward ; this height is called Menaan ; it is the favourite resort of eagles, hawks, gulls, and red-legged crows. Although magnificent in comparison with any cliffs I have seen in England, — and although the natives collecting sea- wrack on the sands below were visible only as specks, the nature of which I could not have determined with the naked eye; — yet Menaan is a mere plaything compared with the stupendous Croaghan, and sinks into insignificance. The summit of this cliff is thickly covered with plants, and I doubt not would amply reward the botanist who would carefully explore it. The plants, dwarfish though they be, are not sufficiently humble to escape the power of the Atlantie breezes. There is an extent of miles covered with a dense network of vegetation, every twig of which leans away from the ocean; this network or mat springs beneath the feet with great elasticity : it is principally composed of Salix herbacea, Salix repens, Arbutus Uvaurs? y Juniperus nanus, Calluna vulgaris, Erica cinerea, and a variety of Carices. Descending from these heights I visited a farm in the bosom of the mountains ; it is the only one of any extent in the island, and is occupied by a Mr. Long. I notice this farm as bearing on the extreme productiveness of the soil of Achill ; it had abundant crops of oats and potatoes, the former so heavy that the only fear respecting them was that they would be laid by the high winds. The soil will produce oats and wheat, year after year, without manure, but wheat is not a desirable crop on account of the want of a good market. Mr. Long's garden contained cabbages, savoys, sea-cale, broad beans, peas, early potatoes, carrots, parsnips, lettuces, onions and turnips, all of them kept free from weeds, and in a slate of vigour and luxuriance that would not be despised by the London market-gardeners. The farm consists of 600 acres. From this farm to the village of Dukinelly the land is well cultivated, although divided into infinitely small patches. The entire island is the nominal property of the Marquis of Sligo, but let for ever to Sir Richard O'Donnel, who, when the land is reclaimed and producing crops, obtains the enormous rent of one shilling per Irish acre from 
his tenantry. 

The natives of Achill are charged with being thieves and murderers ; and if I were to place full reliance on all I heard at the Settlement, they would appear to be so. Mr. Long, however, with everything constantly exposed, — walls and hedges being here unknown, and living amongst a population from whom he has no power at all to defend himself, has never lost even a potato. I allude not to this subject politically ; but bearing in mind solely the natural history of the island and 
its capability of improvement, I pronounce without hesitation, that if goodness of soil, lowness of rent, cheapness of labour and safety of property be recommendations, — then that no spot I have ever seen is more likely to reward the emigrant than the island of Achill. Would that some unpolitical and imsectarian philanthropists, — men who took a human view of the human wants and human failings of these poor islanders, — would settle among them, and place in their hands the plough and the spade, teach the children to read and write, the boys to make shoes and coats, to fish, and to dig, and rake, and sow, and reap, and build houses, and the girls to knit, and spin, and make gowns, — use them like brothers, sisters, and children, — then might this island become a centre of happiness and prosperity. 

At Mr. Long's, on the banks thrown up to divide the fields, and in land not yet fully reclaimed, I observed Osmunda regalis in most luxuriant bushes ; he complained of it as a weed that gave much trouble. Aspidium dilatatum was equally common : in the former part of my paper, at page 551, I spoke of the Irish concave variety as being the Asp. dumetorum of Mackay, supposing that the Asp. dumetorum of Smith was different. I have since learned from Mr. Moore, of Dublin, that he has seen the very plants on which Sir J. E. Smith founded his species ; they are still growing in the Botanic Garden at Liverpool, and are decidedly of that variety called dumetorum by Mackay, concavum by Babington, and recurvum byBree, in < Mag. Nat. Hist.' vol. iv. p. 162> fig. 32,— the figure is a very good one. I saw the specimens myself when at Liverpool towards the end of August last, but not meeting with Mr. Sheppard the curator, I was not aware they were those to which Sir J. E. Smith alludes. I am anxious to correct my error on this subject, as the observation implied an inaccuracy on the part of Mr. Mackay. Mr. Babington' s plant (the identical specimen is before me) is elongated, and rendered more vigorous by having grown in the vicinity of a waterfall. 

Coasting the island as nearly as I could accomplish it from Dukinelly, I at length reached Achill Sound, and then crossed to the inn on the other side. Near this place I observed a great quantity of heath ; some of the Erica cinerea being beautifully white. I also gathered what at the time appeared to me an unusual variety of Erica Tetralix, the leaves being shorter, broader, and very white beneath ; I afterwards learned that this is the Erica Mackaiana. I am too shallow a botanist to offer any opinion as to its being specifically distinct, particularly as it is stamped with the weighty authority of Sir W. J. Hooker. 

Returning over Coraan Achill to Newport, I bent my course southward to Westport, and thence to the little place called Leenanc, at the head of the Killery. The scenery here is wild and picturesque ; the rocks are covered with Saxifraga umbroza, I use the name in ignorance, not knowing the genera and species into which that plant has been divided : I had better say " London Pride," for we cockneys, who cultivate the plant in our sooty gardens, generally combine the species under this one familiar term. It is very delightful to see this plant in its native wilds, adorning the rugged rocks with its elegant panicle of flowers ; in such situations it seems to possess an interest which we never attach to it in a state of cultivation. 

Immediately on starting from the little inn at Leenane, or " Jack Joyce's " as it is usually termed, I found the first specimen I had seen of the Irish heath, — Menziesia poli folia : up to that moment I was unacquainted with the plant, and its appearance was as pleasing as it was unexpected. The 
scenery here is fine ; the Killery, a little creek or arm of the sea, runs up to Leenane between two picturesque chains of hills, and travellers usually hire a boat and disport themselves on the water, in order to obtain a better view of these hills. An excellent road has lately been made from Leenane to Clifden, but the day being very fine, I prolonged the journey by turning off to the left, among the hills, and was repaid by some very pretty scenery. Behind me, or rather, to my left, rose that singular group of hills called the Twelve Pins, and before me, through occasional openings, I frequently saw the sea. There is but little cultivation in these parts ; the bog appears rich, and capable of producing good crops ;, the heaths are luxuriant beyond anything I had ever seen ; the day was very warm and the walking good, the bog being firm and elastic, and in the best possible state for progression. 
It was evening when I reached the little inn at Clifden. 

The next morning I arrived at Roundstone, a place with which a naturalist must be pleased. On approaching it, an enormous seal {Halichceriis GrypJms), apparently 8 or 9 feet long, and of a light or whitish colour, with a black face, and another, much less and nearly black, were basking in the sunshine on a rock in the bay. These seals are most abundant all round the coast of Cunnemara, from Galway to the Killery ; indeed I imagine on nearly every part of the coast of Ireland : they are strong, resolute, and ferocious animals, and totally different from the Phoca vitulina, which is, in these respects, the very reverse. Halicharus Gryphus grows occasionally to an enormous size, sometimes attaining even the length of 12 feet; and Mr. Ball of Dublin told me of one he had killed at Howth harbour, which he believed to weigh five hundred pounds. Phoca vitulina occurs not unfrequently on the north coast of Ireland and among the Scotch islands, but it appears to be nearly expelled from the southern half of Ireland by the more powerful and savage species above referred to, much in the same manner as the old English black rat has yielded to the more powerful animal from Asia, known as the brown or Norway rat. 

I ascended Urrisbeg, a rugged little hill at the back of the town, and was very much delighted with the singular view from its summit : the sinuosity of the ocean-coast, and the multiplicity of islands in the sea, and of lakes on the land, is very remarkable. All over this district Menziesia grows in the utmost profusion, and at the base of Urrisbeg occurs Erica Mediterranean though not abundantly, and here it was first discovered by Mr. Mackay. This plant has since been recorded as occurring in En-is, and on the side of the Mullrea mountain, near the Killery ; but I believe I have the pleasure of first recording its most abundant habitat — Coraan Achill. 
At the foot of Urrisbeg, on the shore of Lough Bulard, Mr. Babington found Adiantum Capillus- Veneris. When at Roundstone, I was not aware of the exact locality, and searched for this rare plant in vain, having no more precise habitat than "near Roundstone." But though unsuccessful in this instance, I was delighted with the variety of ferns which I here found among the boulders by the sea. Aspidium aculeatum and dilatatum, Nephrodium filix-mas, Athyrium jilix-foemina, Blechnum boreale, Asplenium marinum, Aspl. Adiantum-nigrum, Aspl. Tricliomanes, Aspl. Ruta-muraria, Pteris aquilina, and Osmnnda regalis, are crowded together in profusion and endless variety. In the evening I dined with some great men's great men, or rent-collectors for land-proprietors, and from them I learned much as to the fishing &c. in this district. The salmon-fisheries are perhaps the best in the world : about four miles from Roundstone is one taken by a Scotchman, in which, the day I was there, two hundred and eighty-seven salmon were taken. The contractor, I was told, had taken the fishery at 2d. per fish. The fishery was the property of Mr. Martin of Ballinahinch. 

On our breakfast-table next morning were herrings, two kinds of trout, and salmon, all three in the perfection of freshness ; indeed the fish of the west of Ireland is beyond all comparison the finest in flavour that I ever ate ; it is fresh, and in all probability had been swimming at large within an hour of its being placed on the table. The white trout of the west of Ireland is a fish with which I was before unacquainted ; as a species it is perfectly distinct from the salmon or trout Mr. Yarrell, in his ' History of British Fishes,' vol. ii. p. 37, says that the Salmo trutta of Linnaeus, the sea trout of Fleming, and his salmon trout, is the white trout of Ireland ; but there is not a close correspondence between the two. In contradistinction to the common trout, the flesh of the white trout is of richer flavour, and of a deeper orange colour ; its skin is much thicker and more oily, its colour bright silvery, with the exception of the back, which is darker ; it is destitute of orange spots. It is taken abundantly in salt water, and very seldom in fresh. 

After breakfast I resumed my knapsack and turned my back on Roundstone, amidst pelting rain. I saw two eagles soaring in circles far above the summit of Urrisbeg, and others sailing majestically on their way to and from the Twelve Pins. 
I stopped awhile at the salmon-fishery : to this spot the anglers of England — the real knowing ones — find their way, and, enveloped in Mackintoshes, stand for hours at the pools, whipping them with a fly. I saw an extremely fashionable-looking man at this locale; he was accompanied by a Mr. Larry, a very knowing native, who killed the fish of which he — the Englishman — was to be supposed the executioner. The salmon were pounded in, like sheep in a fold, and patiently awaited the evening's hawl; the Englishman threw his fly with untiring diligence, and drew it spinning over the water ; the huge salmon leaped around it almost every second, and I saw Larry hawl to shore a fish of at least eight pounds weight ; this will doubtless cut a conspicuous figure in my unknown countryman's journal : it was on the 17th of July, 1839. 

Ballinahinch, like most of the towns laid down in the maps of Cunnemara, is a single house, the residence of the Martin of Galway for the time being, a man possessing land sufficient for a German principality. It is a pleasant spot, surrounded by the wildest scenery that can be imagined, and the bog half covered with the beautiful Menziesia. 


