WHILST recording the evidences of the warm-blooded Vertebrates which have been found in the London Clay, I take the opportunity of describing some fossils from the same formation, referable to an order of reptiles which appears to have been very sparingly represented in the fauna of former periods of the history of the earth.
  Vertebrae joined enarthrodially by a deep anterior transversely oblong cup and a corresponding prominent posterior ball, and further articulated by two projecting posterior flat oblique processes wedged like the carpenter’s tenon into a mortice excavated in the anterior oblique processes of the succeeding vertebra ; supporting, moreover, on either side of the fore-part of the body, an oblong convexity for the moveable articulation of the rib, belong unequivocally to a reptile of the Ophidian order.
  A group of about thirty vertebrae of this description, with a number of long and slender ribs, having expanded concave vertebral extremities, cemented irregularly together by a mass of indurated clay, forms part of the choice collection of fossils left by John Hunter, and now in the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, London *.
  A portion of the spinal column of apparently the same species of Serpent, measuring eighteen inches in length, and including twenty-eight vertebrae ; a smaller group of seven vertebrae, and a few detached ones, are contained in the museum of Mr. Bowerbank.
  All these specimens are from the Isle of Sheppey.
  The vertebrae in each specimen present the same conformation and nearly the same size: they are as large as those of a Boa Constrictor ten feet in length. They belong to the ordinary dorsal or costal series, but differ from the vertebrae of both Boa and Python in their superior length, as compared with their breadth and height. The ridge continued from the lower anterior to the lovrer posterior oblique processes on each side is less developed in the fossil Ophidian. The oblique processes themselves do not extend so far outwards ; and the spinous process is narrower in its antero-posterior extent, but longer.
  In the first two of the above-mentioned differences the fossil agrees with the Linnsean genus Coluber and its subgenera, but differs from the Crotalus; in the remaining points it differs from Crotalus, Coluber, Najia, and Trigonocephalus. The long and comparatively narrow spine, the outward and backward prolongation of the upper angle of the posterior oblique processes, the uniform convexity of the costal protuberance, the uneven or finely-wrinkled external surface of the superior arch of the vertebra, are characters which distinguish the present Ophidian vertebrae from those of any other genus of the order with which I have been able to compare them ; and I therefore propose to designate the species provisionally by the name of Paloeophis toliapicus.
  The ribs, as in all land-serpents, are hollow.
  In some respects, as the configuration of the under surface of the body of the vertebrae and in the anterior tubercle upon this surface, the fossils agree with the BOCB and Pythons more nearly than with the Colubri, in which the under surface of the abdominal vertebrae are traversed by a median longitudinal ridge ; and in none of the differences above noted can there be inferred any obstacle to the practice of the same arts of entrapping and modes of destroying a living and struggling prey.
  The largest of these Ophidiolites in Mr. Bowerbank’s collection exhibits a portion of the vertebral column suddenly bent upon itself, and indicating the usual lateral flexibility of the spine.
  If we may suppose the species to have had the same number of vertebras as the existing Boas, it must have exceeded eleven feet in length, and such dimensions would indicate that the species was not provided with poison-fangs. Serpents, of these dimensions, exist in the present day only in warm or tropical regions, and their food is by no means restricted to animals of the cold-blooded classes. The remains of Birds and Mammalia are those which are most commonly found in the alimentary canal of such as are brought to this country dead ; and living birds or quadrupeds also constitute the favourite food of the Pythons and Boas, of similar dimensions, which are exhibited in our menageries. If, therefore, there had not been obtained direct evidence of both Birds and Mammals in the London clay, I should have felt persuaded that they must have coexisted with Serpents of such dimensions as the species of which the dorsal vertebrce and ribs are here described.


