BEFORE commencing the present Report, I must express my great obligation to Mr. Bain for the opportunity of studying the extraordinary fossil remains which form its subject, and for the favour which that zealous explorer of South African geology has conferred on me, by coupling, with his transmission of the fossils to the care of the Geological Society, the request that I would undertake their description.

  The endeavour to fulfil this request has yielded me the highest pleasure; and here I must state, that it is chiefly by the timely and active assistance of an intelligent workman, skilled in removing from fossil bones their hard adherent matrix, and of Mr. Scharf’s well-known artistic ability in preparing the accompanying illustrations of the fossils, so displayed,—aids, which the President, H. Warburton, Esq., M.P., most promptly and liberally, at his own expense, placed at my disposal,—that I have been enabled so soon to obtain the results which are embodied in the present part of my Report.
  The most remarkable character of the fossils selected for description is that which their discoverer, Mr. Bain, has indicated by calling them ‘ Bidentals ’: viz. the presence of two long, curved and sharp-pointed tusks, which, like those of the Walrus, Musk-deer and Machairodus, descend, one from each superior maxillary bone, and pass on the outside of the fore-part of the lower jaw.
    This dental character has hitherto been manifested only by Mammals, and is rare in that class: the species above-cited are almost the only ones which present it as conspicuously as do the African fossils under consideration. The first cursory examination however of these crania, as they originally came into my hands, roughly hewn out of their rocky matrix, which concealed most of their anatomical characters, sufficed to demonstrate that they had belonged to a cold-blooded class of vertebrate animals. In one, the fore-part of the skull showed the median undivided process of a single ‘ os intermaxillare ’ ascending and separating two distinct anterior nasal apertures; in a second f, the boundaries of a much-contracted cranial box were traceable; both characters combined to prove that the animals to which these fossil skulls belonged had been air-breathing, oviparous and cold-blooded,—in short, Reptilia; but members, in this class, neither of the Crocodilian nor Chelonian orders.
  No mammiferous animal has the intermaxillary bone single, or the external bony opening of the nasal cavity double : neither Mammal nor Bird has the cavity for the brain so small in proportion to the skull as in the fossil referred to. All Crocodilians, fossil as well as recent, have the intermaxillary bones divided by a median suture, and the anterior nasal aperture single and in the median line, as in Mammals : in all Chelonians the same aperture is single, and perforated in the middle of the fore-part of the skull, just where the specimen with this part most entire and most resembling in its general outward form that of a Tortoise (Dicynodon testudiceps), presents the convex, imperforate, ascending median plate of the broad intermaxillary bone. Fishes were out of the question, they having no well-defined external respiratory inlets to nasal passages.	

   The Lacertine Sauria offered all the characters which could be distinguished in the partially unshrouded fossils; but the single intermaxillary bone and the double nostrils being likewise present in most Ophidians and a few Batrachians, it became necessary to inspect and compare more closely and extensively the anatomical characters of the fossil crania in question in order to determine precisely their immediate affinities.
   My first task, therefore, was to supervise the chiselling away of the extremely hard and adherent sandstone which covered almost every part of the surface of the skulls about to be described.
   The large and immoveably articulated superior maxillary bones, the strong and complete zygomatic arch continued thence to the tympanic bone, were decisive against the Ophidians and Batrachians; few indeed of the existing Lacertians manifest these characters so strongly developed as they were in the fossils : yet other structures were brought to light, as the vertically-descending tympanic pedicles, suspended by their upper extremity from the junction of the zygomatic and mastoid bones, which added important evidence to the nasal and intermaxillary characters in proof of the essential relationship of the bidental Reptilia to the Lacertian order.
   The broad and almost entire plate of bone, continued vertically down from the bifurcated parietal to the occipital foramen, now so clearly displayed in the skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps (PI. IV. fig. 2.), was, however, a cranial modification only presented by the Crocodilia in the existing class of Reptiles; but the minor deviations from the ordinary Lacertian structure are so numerous, the mode in which Crocodilian and Chelonian characters are interwoven upon an essentially Lacertian base is so interesting, and the individual and distinctive characters of the Dicynodons so striking and peculiar, as to require for their illustration a detailed and consecutive osteological description of the specimens at present worked out, in which I shall indicate, as I proceed, the affinities illustrated by such characters.
   Sufficient has been said to demonstrate at least the generic distinction of the ancient Reptilia of the African sandstones, which were armed with two canine tusks ; and postponing for the present the consideration of the claims of the different species here determined to subgeneric rank, which are most likely to be established when the entire skeleton is brought to light, I shall provisionally include them all under the generic name of Dicynodon.

DICYNODON LACERTICEPS.
   Commencing with the most perfect of the fossil skulls* which have at present been worked out of the hard matrix, the longer and narrower facial part which it presented, in comparison with the others, suggested to me the term ' lacerticeps,’ lizard-headed, for the species to which it belonged.
   The occipital region of this skull (PI. IV. fig. 2.) is well-preserved, and is formed by a moderately broad, triangular, vertical, continuous wall of bone, overhung by an angular horizontal ridge, about half an inch in breadth, and shaped like the penthouse of a gable-end; this ridge is formed by the supra-occipital (4), the parietal (8), and the mastoid (7) bones.
   This character is peculiar, as has been already observed, to the Crocodilians among existing Reptilia. The Chelonians all present a strong and long spine developed backwards from immediately above the foramen magnum. The Lacertians and Ophidians have two wide vacuities in the occipital region over-arched by the elongated mastoids, which in Serpents are prolonged backwards. In the Batra- chians the low and narrow occipital region slopes directly forwards from the great foramen, and presents also another and more decisive difference in the two condyles for the articulation of the head with the vertebral column and their lateral position in respect of the occipital foramen.
   This foramen (m) in the, Dicynodon lacerticeps, is vertically oval, with the large end downwards : its lower fourth part is bounded by a single subhemispherical, convex, articular condyle, which was partly broken away in the specimen. The upper angles of the condyle are separated by a smooth depression from two small obtuse prominences, projecting one on each side the middle of the great foramen, immediately below the suture which divides the ex-occipitals (2, 2) from the supra-occipital (4).
   On the fractured surface of the occipital condyle we perceive two fine lines of the matrix, commencing from near the middle of its upper border which forms the lower part of the foramen, and diverging as they descend, dividing the osseous substance of the prominence, like veins traversing a rock, into three equal parts. These veins of matrix mark the sutures between the basi-occipital (1) and ex-occipitals (2, 2), which three elements enter, in the same proportions, into the formation of the condyle as in the existing Lizards.
   In the Crocodiles the single condyle is formed almost exclusively by the basi- occipital, and its upper angles are not continued upon the sides of the foramen. In the Chelonians the three elements of the occipital hone contribute to form the condyle, as in Lizards and the Dicynodon; but they project backwards from the

floor of the cranial cavity before forming the articular convexity, which constitutes no immediate part of the circumference of the foramen magnum (m). The shape of the foramen itself in the Chelonians is more like that of the Dicynodon than it is in the Lizards. In the Chelonians the lower three-fourths of the foramen is formed by the ex-occipitals ; in the Crocodilians the upper three-fourths. In the Dicynodon the basi-occipital (1) forms a very small part of the lower border of the foramen ; the ex-occipitals (2) constitute the rest of its lower half, and it is completed above by the broad and high supra-occipital (4). In the Crocodilians this element is excluded from any share in the formation of the foramen magnum. The Dicynodon, therefore, in the essential anatomical characters of the occipital region of the skull, and in its shape, chiefly due to the angle formed by the overhanging parieto-mastoid ridge, adheres to the Lacertian type; but in the extent and ossification of this region it resembles the Crocodilia. It is not, however, devoid of characteristics peculiar to itself: the broad semicircular lower half of the occiput sends out a series of short and thick, equidistant processes, like rays. Two (/', V) are continued downwards and a little outwards from the infero-lateral parts of the basi-occipital:	above these the longer and stronger par-occipital
processes (3, 3)# extend outwards and a little downwards to abut against the lower ends of the tympanic pedicles: the next process (2') above is a narrower and shorter one, which projects from the upper and outer angle of the par- occipital into the interspace separating it from the tympanic bone; but, apparently, without effecting a junction with that bone: the fourth radiating process (4') on each side forms the lower prominent angle of the triangular supra- occipital plate, and abuts against the mastoid bone. The condyloid foramen (2") is large, and is pierced on each side of the single condyle; not, as in the Crocodiles, above that prominence.
  In commencing the examination and comparison of the upper region of the skull of the Dicynodon (PI. III. fig. 2.), we cannot fail to be struck with the very contracted form of the cranium proper (8, 8'), which is scarcely more than two-thirds the breadth of the inter-orbital space. It reminds one of the lowest Batrachians.; but the temporal vacuities (t, t), on each side, are divided by a strong bridge of bone from the orbits, which is not the case with the Batrachians. This transverse bar or bridge is chiefly formed by the post-frontals (11, 11), which are not produced backwards, as in most Lizards : neither do the mastoids (7, 7) join the post-frontals to overarch any part of the temporal spaces, as in the Crocodilians ; but they are confined to the posterior circumference of those spaces, which are bounded or over-arched laterally by a single bridge, formed chiefly by the zygomatic
   


or temporal bones (27, 27). In the strength of these bones and their continuation from the lower part of the post-orbital wall, the Dicynodon much more resembles the Crocodilians, especially the extinct forms, than it does the Lacertians: the zy- gomatics are nevertheless continued, as in most Lacertians, to the upper, and not to the lower end of the tympanic pedicles, as they are in the Crocodiles.
   In some existing Lacertians, as the Acrodont species figured*, the temporal vacuities are over-arched by two bony bridges extended in the axis of the skull, one from the upper angle of the orbit, formed by the post-frontal and mastoid, to the upper end of the os tympanicum ; the other from the lower angle of the orbit, formed by the malar and zygomatic, to the lower end of the os tympanicum. This is essentially a repetition of a Crocodilian structure; the extinct Teleosaurus most resembling the Lizard cited in the length and slenderness of the two bridges. The Rhyncho- saurus of our own new red sandstones seems to have presented the same structure; but part of the lower or zygomatic bridge is broken off in the only specimen of the skull of that genus I have hitherto seen. The exact shape and vertical extent of the strong single bridge formed by the zygomatic and mastoid, in the Dicynodon, cannot be determined in the present fossil, in which the upper border is broken away. In the formation and position of the single zygomatic arch, the Dicynodon most resembles the genus Testudo ; only the arch abuts against a smaller proportion of the upper and anterior border of the os tympanicum in the bidental fossil.
   The part of the single narrow parietal bone which separates the temporal fossae from each other is impressed on each side by an oblique smooth tract, indicating the origin of the strong temporal muscle ; the upper boundary-ridges of the tracts almost meet along the posterior half of the parietal, but diverge as they advance forwards and curve outwards to be continued upon the post-frontals. The intermediate flat, triangular space of the parietal included by these diverging lines is perforated by a small elliptical foramen : this character of the parietal bone is peculiar, amongst existing Reptiles, to the Lacertia, though far from being constant in that order : it appears to have been present in the skull of the extinct Pistosaurus. The relative position of the foramen is the same as in the Rhynchocephalus figured and in the great Monitor Javanicus-f, behind the transverse sagittal suture ; not, as in the Iguana j, upon that suture. The posterior part of the parietal bone of the Dicynodon expands and bifurcates ; this is also a peculiarly Lacertian character. The extremities of the parietal forks (8', 8') unite with the strong mastoids (7, 7), which receive the extremities of the zygomatics (27), and form, with them, the medium of attachment of the tympanic pedicles to the cranium. These are strong bones

(28) descending from the above attachments with a sigmoid curve in a vertical direction, with a slight inclination forwards. They are relatively stronger than in most Lizards, but are less robust and longer than in the Crocodilians or Chelonians, in which the tympanic pedicles are wedged immoveably into the interspace of surrounding bones, and in the Crocodilia extend obliquely downwards and backwards. The position of the tympanic pedicles, and their comparatively free suspension, are very characteristic of the Lacertian affinities of the Dicynodon. They terminate below by a broad and slightly convex condyle, looking downwards and forwards, for articulating with the lower jaw, and near this part receive abutments from the par-occipital and sphenoid bones.
  The form of the temporal fossae (t, t) is a wide oval, with its long axis almost parallel with that of the skull. The orbits (o, o) are large and almost circular, with a complete bony frame or boundary. In the present species (D. lacerticeps) they are relatively as large as in most Lizards, and larger than in the Crocodiles. Their position, equidistant from both ends of the skull, is also a Lacertian character: in the Crocodiles the orbits are nearer the back part, in the Chelonians they are nearer the fore-part of the skull.
  The inter-orbital part of the surface of the skull is one-third broader than the inter-temporal region, or true cranium, and gradually expands as it extends forwards. The contour of this part of the skull descends into the nasal region by a gentle convex curve (fig. 1.) : the surface is a little depressed along the middle, and rises into a slight protuberance at the fore-part of the supra-orbital boundary, which is formed by the pre-frontal (14). The mid-frontal (12) is divided by a median suture, as in the Varanian Lizards and the Chelonia: it is a single bone in the Crocodiles. In the Dicynodon, as in the Iguanas and American Monitors (Tho- rides, Tejus, &c.), the mid-frontal forms the middle two-thirds of the supra-orbital ridge: the posterior part of this ridge and the upper half of the posterior rim of the orbit are contributed by the post-frontal (11), which forms the medium of union between the mid-frontal, parietal, malar and zygomatic bones. The malar (PI. III. fig. 1,20a*) and superior maxillary bones (20) appear to be indistinguishably blended together below the orbit, where they swell out in an unusual degree, and carry the floor of the orbit much beyond the roof; turning the aspect of the plane of the orbit obliquely upwards and outwards, as in the Crocodiles, and rendering it less vertical than in most Lizards. The fore-part of the orbit is bounded by the lachrymal bone (16), which is extended upon the face, apparently as far as to the back part of the nostril, in the present species. A single moderately large lachrymal foramen
   

(fig. 2, /) is pierced just within the brim of the orbit, and defended by a protuberance of the lachrymal bone in front of it.
   The bony anterior apertures of the nasal cavity (n) are separated above by a space two-thirds of an inch in breadth, and formed principally by the nasal bones, between the anterior ends of which, the median ascending process of the intermaxillary bone is wedged. The shape of the nasal openings (n) is a longitudinal ellipse; they are situated about half an inch in advance of the orbits, are defined above by a sharp overhanging border of the nasal bones, and the lower boundary, which is formed by the superior maxillaries (20), is rounded off into the nasal cavity : the plane of the opening being much nearer the perpendicular than is that of the orbit. In the Crocodiles the plane of the single median bony nostril is horizontal; in the Chelonia it is nearly or quite vertical; in the Lizards the nostrils are double ; and in many, as Uromastyx and Rhynchocephalus, are as lateral in position and aspect as in the Dicynodon. A very remarkable feature of the present fossil cranium is the swelling out of the superior maxillary and malar bones below the orbits, which part is the point d’appui of four strong bony columns: one of these is formed by the lachrymal (16) and pre-frontal (14) and descends in front of the orbit; a second, formed by the malar (20 a) and post-frontal (11), descends behind the orbit; the third, formed by the zygomatic (27), extends longitudinally from the back part of the malo-m axillary protuberance to the tympanic pedicle ; the fourth, contributed by the £os transversum,’ is continued from the under part of the maxillary bone, anterior to the orbit, downwards, backwards and inwards to abut against the pterygoids. The superior maxillary bone commences anteriorly by a suture, very distinctly shown in a specimen of the fore-part of the cranium of the Dicynodon testudiceps*, which extends down from the nostril to the alveolar border of the upper jaw; the bone extends backwards, forming the lower border of the nostril, and uniting with the lachrymal bone, as it passes to the lower part of the orbit; then expanding rapidly, as it proceeds, to coalesce with the malar bone. This expanded suborbital part of the maxillary bone or malo-maxillary bone, supported by the four converging stout osseous columns above described, is excavated by a wide and deep conical alveolus, with a circular area of equal diameter,—half an inch,—to its closed base, and lodging a long and strong, slightly curved and sharp- pointed canine tooth or tusk, which projects about two inches from the open extremity of the produced socket. The direction of the tusks is forwards, downwards and very slightly inwards; the two converging, as they descend along the outer side of the compressed symphysis of the lower jaw. The fractured state of the fore-part of the present fossil cranium anterior to the nostrils prevents the

recognition of its exact form and extent, and also the more important determination of the structure of the intermaxillary bone (19). This deficiency is, however, amply compensated by the perfect state of the fore-part of the skull of the allied species, Dicynodon testudiceps; in the description of which, the affinities deducible from the modifications of the intermaxillary and palatal regions will be more fully discussed.
   I may observe however, that in the present specimen of the Dicynodon lacer- ticeps, the fore-part of the upper jaw has been longer and more compressed than in the other recognizable species of the bidental genus, and that no trace is perceptible of any other teeth than the two long canine tusks above described. It is evident that the carcase of the old reptile to which the skull in question belonged must have been buried in the sand, which subsequent consolidation converted into the present hard matrix, soon after death, and there have rested undisturbed until its discovery by Mr. Bain: for the lower jaw has not suffered the smallest dislocation from its natural junction with the extremities of the tympanic pedicles ; and this is not a joint where there is close interlocking of the opposed surfaces of the bones, as in the mandibular articulation of the Badger and some other Mammalia. A shallow cavity, cut obliquely in the posterior part of the lower jaw, receives the corresponding slight convexity at the end of the tympanic pedicle. Thus attached, the lower jaw has been cemented by the surrounding rock in its natural position, but with the mouth a little open. The skull of the Rhynchosaurus* from the new red sandstone at Grinsill near Shrewsbury has the lower jaw similarly preserved, showing the same speedy entombment and subsequent undisturbed repose in that triassic matrix.
   The lower jaw manifests by its great depth as compared with its length, and by its edentulous condition, a close and important relationship between the Dicynodon and Rhynchosaurus; but this part of our ancient African Lacertian deviated still further from the ordinary proportions of the lower jaw in the Crocodiles and Lizards, and more closely resembled that of the Tortoises and Turtles, in being still shorter in proportion to its depth than in the Rhynchosaur: it appears, however, to have differed from the lowTer jaws of all other known recent and extinct Reptiles, by the evident traces of a strong longitudinal ridge projecting outwards from the middle of the external surface of each ramus. A feeble rudiment of such ridge is present in the lower jaw of the Rhynchocephalus figured, and is developed, as in the Dicynodon, from the dentary piece. There is no trace of teeth or their sockets in the lower jaw of the Dicynodon testudiceps: so much of the alveolar border as is exposed presents a smooth and even edge, which seems to have played like a scissor-blade upon the inner side of the corresponding edentulous border of the upper jaw; and it is

most probable, from the analogies of similarly shaped jaws of existing Reptilia, that the fore-part of both the upper and under jaws were sheathed with horn.
   Amongst existing Reptilia, the Siren alone combines this structure with true teeth: but these are minute and numerous, and disposed upon the palate in the upper jaw, and upon the opercular piece of the lower jaw: in other respects the cranial structure of the Siren is as remote from that of the Dicynodon as can well be in any Reptile, if we may be permitted so to call the Siren. It is the chief and best-known characteristic of the Turtles and Tortoises to have the jaws sheathed with horn, as those of the Dicynodon appear to have been; but no known member of the Chelonian order has any true teeth#. Until the discovery of the Rhynchosau- rus, this edentulous and horn-sheathed condition of the jaws was supposed to be peculiar to the Chelonian order among Reptiles; and it is not one of the least interesting features of the Dicynodon of the African sandstones, that it should repeat a Chelonian character, hitherto peculiar, amongst Lacertians, to the remarkable extinct edentulous genus of the new red sandstone of Shropshire : but our interest rises almost to astonishment, when, in a Saurian skull, we find superadded to the horn- clad mandibles of the Tortoise a pair of tusks, borrowed as it were from the Mammalian class, or rather foreshowing a structure, which in the present existing creation is peculiar to certain members of the highest organized warm-blooded animals.
   The Reptilian nature of the Dicynodon is not more strongly evidenced by the characters of the cranial and facial bones, than by the compound structure of the lower jaw: that attached to the skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps has had most of its exterior surface splintered and broken away: a portion of a detached lower jaw of apparently the same species of Dicynodon shows the entire anterior end, and gives the two sections 5 and 6 in Plate IV. But, before speaking of the traces of the sutures thus exposed, the general form of the lower jaw may be more particularly noticed (PI. III. fig. 1.), It gradually increases in depth from the posterior articulation forwards to the symphysis, which then expands more suddenly in the vertical direction and curves slightly upwards ; the rami converge at a very acute angle in approaching that part, and suddenly bend inwards at their lower border to join and form the symphysis (PI. IV. fig. 4, 24), at a distance of three inches and a half from the posterior articulation; the whole length of the lower jaw being four inches and a half, perhaps five inches, including the posterior angle, which in the present example is broken away on both sides. The depth of the ramus immediately in front of the articulation is nearly one inch ; at the middle of the ramus it *

is one inch and one-third; at the fore-part of the symphysis it seems to have increased to the depth of two inches, but the apex is broken away. The lower border of the jaw is slightly concave : the angular process appears to have been continued but a very little way beyond the articular cavity, which is excavated on the posterior surface, sloping from the coronoid eminence backwards to the angle. That eminence, which is developed from the coronoid or complementary piece (26 a), is low and long, and rises behind the middle of the ramus. A strong ridge projects from the outside of the jaw, extending along the middle third of the ramus, equidistant from the alveolar and the lower borders of the jaw (PI. IV. figs. 3 & 6, 24). Anterior to the coronoid the upper border of the jaw rises with a gentle concave curve as it advances forward to meet and join the opposite border at the upper extremity of the strong and vertically extended symphysis: the fore-part of the symphysis is convex from side to side, three-fourths of an inch broad, and slopes from below upwards and forwards with a gentle convex curvature, without any trace of median suture. It is divided by a slight ridge on each side, externally, from the concavities receiving the tusks when the mouth is closed.
   On the right side of the lower jaw, attached to the cranium, the posterior pointed extremity of the fractured remains of the angular piece (PI. III. fig. 1, 26), may be clearly traced, terminating about half an inch in advance of the glenoid articulation : this is supported by the articular piece (25), which forms exclusively the small angular process behind and below the joint for the attachment of the digastric muscle. The outer wall of the left ramus is broken away so as to expose the outer surface of the anterior part of the articular piece, which extends forwards upon the inner side of the ramus in a pointed form nearly half-way towards the symphysis, where it joins the opercular or splenial piece, 25 a.
   The sur-angular extends from the articulation forwards, beneath the large complementary or coronoid piece, terminating gradually in a point between that and the dentary. It is cut across near this extremity at 25 in fig. 6. PI. IV.; and the trihedral form of its thicker posterior part is shown at 25 in fig. 5.
   The coronoid or complementary piece, 26 a, is a large bone, forming the upper border of the middle two-thirds of the ramus. It commences by a point posteriorly, which rests upon both articular and sur-angular pieces ; gradually enlarges, chiefly in the vertical direction, as it extends forwards ; is grooved upon its upper thin border, and more widely and deeply excavated below, where it receives the tapering anterior extremity of the sur-angular: both grooves are shown in the section PI. IV. fig. 6, through near the middle of the ramus at 26 a: the slender posterior end of the coronoid piece is cut through at 26 a in fig. 5. The angular piece, which forms no part of the angle of the jaw in Dicynodon any more than it does in modern Lizards, extends from beneath the articulation along the lower border of the jaw, increasing

in thickness and forming an angular groove on its inner side, as shown in the section through the posterior third of the ramus at 26, fig. 5. PI. IV., joining the splenial element 25 a by its lower inwardly inflected border. At the middle of the ramus it presents an angular excavation on its outer part, pointed behind for the reception of the lower pointed branch of the dentary piece, and increases in depth as it diminishes in thickness, forming the thin plate on the inner side of the dentary piece, exposed in'the middle section, fig. 6, 26 ; the lower border of the angular there curving inwards and forming a groove for the reception of the lower border of the splenial element 25 a, which presents two grooves for the reciprocal reception of the edges of the single groove in the angular piece, the two elements being there doubly interlocked together. The dentary piece, which forms the whole of the strong and large simple symphysis, commences in each ramus behind by a bifurcate extremity, the upper fork reaching to the posterior third of the ramus: it is shown at 24 in the section through that part. It there joins the sur-angular (25), and increasing in thickness as it advances forward soon joins the coronoid, and now takes on a trihedral form as in fig. 6, 24, the outer angle forming the strong outer ridge before described : it also increases in depth, and at the last section the upper and lower forks have united ; the lower fork forming the thin plate of bone applied to the outer side of the angular piece, and fitting into the angular notch in that bone. About half an inch anterior to the bifurcation, the portions of the dentary in each ramus unite to form the symphysis, which has already been described, and which shows no trace of median suture. A considerable vacuity occupies the substance of each ramus, bounded at the middle of the ramus, as shown in section fig..6, by the dentary and angular pieces externally, by the splenial and coronoid pieces internally, by the sur-angular and coronoid above, and the interlocked opercular and angular pieces below. This vacuity communicates with the external surface in the form of a narrow elongate fissure, bounded anteriorly by the two forks of the dentary, and behind by the upper fork of the dentary, the sur-angular and the angular pieces. This fissure appears to have been closed on the inner side of the ramus by the splenial or opercular piece.
   The alveolar border of the lower jaw is slightly grooved, as in the Trionyx ; the outer border of the groove being most produced, and forming the trenchant edge. In the edentulous character of the alveolar border, in the anchylosed symphysis, in the depth of the rami and its general form, the lower jaw most resembles that of the Chelonian Reptiles. In the external fissure above described, and the posterior bifurcation of the dentary piece, it resembles the lower jaw of the Crocodile ; but in the more essential characters of its composition it agrees more closely with the Lacertian type of the same bone. Thus the angle of the jaw is formed by the articular, not by the angular piece, as in the Crocodile : the coronoid or

complementary piece, instead of the insignificant size to which it is reduced in the Crocodiles and most Chelonians, presents proportions surpassing those of most Lacertians: the upper margin for the attachment of the temporal muscle is intermediate in height between that in the Crocodiles and the more angular elevation of the coronoid in most Lizards. In the proportion of the dentary to the other elements of the composite bone, the Dicynodon resembles the Lacertians, the dentary piece forming a much larger proportion of the lower jaw in the Crocodiles and Chelonians; but the entire structure of the bone exemplifies, as remarkably as the rest of the skull, the singular engrafting of Crocodilian and Che- lonian characters upon an essentially Lacertian basis.
DICYNODON TESTUDICEPS.
   The specimen on which the above-named, or tortoise-headed, species of Dicynodon is founded is the anterior two-thirds of a skull, without lower jaw ; including the nostrils, the orbits and the bony palate, with the anterior and posterior palatal apertures (PI. V. & PI. VI. fig. 1.).
   It differs in a readily appreciable and well-marked degree from the last-described skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps, by the greater breadth and less length of the facial part of the skull, by the smaller orbits and larger nostrils, and by the greater declivity of the contour of the internasal and intermaxillary regions. In D. lacerticeps (PI. III. fig. 1.) the profile of the internasal plate is continued from the inter-orbital region, with a slight declivity, almost straight to the intermaxillary bone. In D. testudiceps{PI. VI. fig. 1.) the profile bends down directly from the inter-orbital region, and rapidly descends to the edentulous border of the intermaxillary bone. The distance from the posterior border of the orbit to the anterior border of the nostril is rather less in the Dicynodon testudiceps than it is in D. lacert'ceps ; but the breadth between the supra-orbitary ridges in Dicynodon testudiceps is greater, being one inch and two-thirds, and that between the supra-nasal ridges is one inch. The general size of the two fossil skulls compared must have been nearly alike : their specific difference will be obvious from the comparisons above made : the generic identity of the shorter and broader-headed species is shown by the bases of the tvro large tusks which remain in the sockets of the expanded maxillaries, their exserted crowns having been broken off (PI. V. fig. 1, c).
   The breadth and shortness of the skull, the sudden convex declivity of the rostral part, and the sharp vertical, edentulous border of the wide intermaxillary bone, are features of resemblance to the skull of the Tortoise which would at once strike the anatomist acquainted with the peculiar form of that part of the skeleton of the Chelonian Reptile; and they have suggested to me the specific name proposed for the present species. But differences of a more essential nature present them-
L 2

selves when we come to a closer comparison. Where the orbits look out from the Tortoise’s skull, the anterior nostrils open in that of the Dicvnodon : where the single nostril is perforated in front of the skull of the Tortoise, we find a broad, convex, solid wall of bone in the Dicynodon.
   The resemblance to the Tortoise is due merely to modifications of proportion and shape of the hones ; in the essential anatomical structure of the skull, the present fossil agrees with the more complete skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps : and seeing in both the same aspect of the orbits, the same lateral position of the two distinct nostrils, the same expansion of the maxillary bones with their singular dental weapons, we may safely conclude, that the parts which are complete in the skull of one species must have differed from those which are mutilated or wanting in the other species, only in their form and proportion, and not by any essential anatomical modifications. With this conviction, the entire and well-preserved intermaxillary and palatal region of the skull of the Dicynodon testudiceps gives important additional evidence of the nature and affinities of the extinct genus.
   All the Crocodilia retain the median suture of the intermaxillaries ; most of the Chelonia likewise retain it * : in neither order is there any median ascending intermaxillary process. The Ophidians and most of the Lacertians (all of them according to Cuvier)f possess a single intermaxillary bone, which sends a median process upwards to the interspace dividing the nostrils. In these orders the type of the intermaxillary bone of the Bird is foreshadowed, but the size of the bone is very diminutive as compared with Birds.
   In the portion of the skull of the Dicynodon testudiceps the whole extent and structure of the os intermaxillare (19) is clearly displayed : there is no trace of median suture on either the external or palatal portions of the bone : it has a median * branche montante,’ which, at the middle emargination of its upper sinuous border, receives the extremities of the nasal bones (15): as it descends from the internasal space it expands, and at the fore-part of the lower border of the nasal aperture meets and joins the superior maxillary bone. The Dicynodon, by the superior size of the intermaxillary bone, pushes the resemblance of its cranial organization to that of Birds much further than do the other Reptilia with the same undivided condition of that bone. I may here however remark, that some of the ancient Saurians, more especially the marine forms, are remarkable for the greater proportion of their divided intermaxillaries than is manifested by the modern Crocodilia. The inferior trenchant border of the intermaxillary bone in the Dicynodon testudiceps describes nearly a semicircle horizontally, between the sutures with the maxillary bones (PI. V. fig. 1, 20). The middle part of the edentulous border is a little produced and


strengthened by two short and narrow buttresses of bone on the inner side, 19', dividing that part of the wall of the mouth into a narrow and deep median depression and two wide and shallow lateral depressions, bounded posteriorly by the inward prominence of the sockets of the great maxillary tusks.
   A second and more peculiar feature of the palatal region is a longitudinal ridge, formed by the vomer (13), which descends from the middle line, commencing one inch behind the anterior border of the intermaxillary, and after an extent of one inch and a half, subsiding close to the fore-part of the posterior nasal aperture. The vomerine ridge, at its middle part between the sockets of the tusks, is about half an inch in depth : it must strengthen the palatine vault or arch of bone, just as similar appendages of a Gothic roof are introduced to give additional strength as well as ornament. We may therefore regard this structure, which I have not observed in any recent Saurian, as physiologically related to the uses of the tusks of the Dicynodon.
   There are no clear or well-defined traces of anterior palatine apertures in the present fossil; an unbroken vault of bone seems to extend from the edentulous border of the intermaxillary and the great maxillary alveoli to the single median vacuity (p'), which I take to be the posterior outlet of the nasal cavity. This is of an oval form, one inch two-thirds long, one inch broad, with the great end behind: there is a shallow longitudinal depression on each side of the fore-part of the aperture ; the inner border of the depression, formed by the palatine (21) and ento-pterygoid is produced into a ridge, but supports no teeth; the outer boundary of the depression is formed by apparently the os transversum or exo-pterygoid (23), which thence extends outwards and forwards to abut against the back part of the alveolar border of the maxillary. In the place of the depressions, we find in some Lacertians, as Varanus niloticus, perforations, corresponding with the larger vacuities in the same part of the palate in the Crocodilians. If, as appears from the carefully exposed palatine surface of the fossil under description, that surface is imperforate anterior to the large median aperture (p'), the condition of the bony palate is essentially the same as in the genera Testudo and Chelone; but the ante- ri6r, imperforate tract of bone is much more extensive in Dicynodon. In some Emydes, and in Trionyx, where the palatal bony roof is of greater extent, it is perforated by an anterior median aperture just behind the intermaxillary border. An analogous aperture is present in the Crocodilians, which is indubitably not the case with the Dicynodon.
   The palate of all the existing Lizards that I have examined or found figured in books, presents two anterior palatal apertures besides the single large median posterior vacuity ; and most of them have likewise two lateral vacancies, bounded internally by the vomerine and palatine bones, externally by the maxillary bones : the Varani have, besides, the pterygoid lateral perforations. Of none of these cha-

racters can I detect any trace in the specimen before me. I am disposed therefore to conclude, that the resemblance to the Chelonian type of cranium, so strikingly exemplified in the edentulous lower jaw and intermaxillary border, may have been extended to the composition of the bony palate.
   Returning to the upper surface of the portion of skull under consideration (PI. V. fig. 2.'i, we find the region between the upper border of the ascending process of the intermaxillary and the middle of the inter-orbital space formed by a broad rhomboidal tract, including the nasal, 15, pre-frontal, 14, and part of the mid-frontal, 12, bones : the median suture dividing the latter is discernible. The rhomboidal tract has a more unequal surface than the corresponding narrower part of the skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps: the prominences developed from the pre-frontals at the anterior part of the orbits are more marked, and they are divided by depressions from an intermediate prominence at the middle of the tract. The inter-orbital tract is traversed by two longitudinal shallow channels, divided by a median gentle longitudinal rising, and bounded laterally by the raised supra-orbital ridges.
   The back part of the cranium has been broken away from the present skull through the parietal foramen, and just behind the commencement of the smooth depressions that mark the origins of the strong temporal muscles (t, t). The thickness of the parietal bone at this part is nearly half an-inch ; such strength of the cranial bones is both a Chelonian and Crocodilian character. The orbits, o, have a smaller vertical diameter than in the Dicynodon lacerticeps; their lower boundary is thick and rounded off; a gradually widening and nearly flat floor of the orbit extends obliquely inwards, downwards and backwards; the lower boundary of the orbit extends straight, outwards and backwards, for two inches; forming, at the fractured end, the beginning of the zygomatic arch, but showing no tendency to curve upwards here, to form the posterior boundary of the orbit, nor any mark of union with such a boundary: if this boundary was completed, as is probable from the analogy of the preceding specimen, posterior to the fractured part of the zygomatic arch, the antero-posterior diameter of the orbit must have been both absolutely and relatively greater than in the Dicynodon lacerticeps. The Crocodilia and Ophidia vera have no bony floor to the orbit: most Lacertia and Chelonia have that structure, but it is much closer to the palate than in the Dicynodon. The expansion of the malo-maxillary bone both vertically and transversely, to form the socket for the tusk, gives a peculiar form and development to the under part of the orbit of the bidental Reptiles of the African sandstones, which will be readily appreciated by comparison of the present specimen or the figures (PI. IV. & V.),with the skull of any existing Reptile ; it will be seen, however, that it is merely an adaptive modification, in subordination to the support of the tusks, which gives so mammalian a character to this part of the skull of the Dicynodon.

DICYNODON (?) STRIGICEPS. 
   This species is founded on the anterior or rostral part of a skull of a Dicyno- don(?), which, in proportion to its height and breadth, is as much shorter than that of the Dicynodon testudiceps, as this is in comparison with the skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps. The breadth of the inter-orbital space is equal to that in the Dicynodon lacerticeps, but it is more concave; it is less than that of the Dicynodon testudiceps, and there is no median longitudinal rising, as in that species. The breadth between the upper and posterior part of the nostrils is equal to that in the Dicynodon testudiceps ; but the rostral contour, continued from the horizontal inter-orbital tract, describes, in descending, a semicircular curve, convex forwards, and with the lower part bending back to form the alveolar, or rather edentulous trenchant anterior border of the mouth.
   This form of muzzle not only distinguishes the present species from its congeners, but is unique in the Reptilian class. The orbits, o, fig. 2, with prominent anterior borders, are thus brought close to the fore-part of the head ; the nostrils, n, instead of being in front of the orbits, are beneath them : the physiognomy of the old reptile must have resembled that of the Owl, with its horny beak curving downwards and backwards from between the advanced staring eyes; and I have indicated this resemblance by the proposed specific name. The outer surface of the convex internasal ascending process of the intermaxillary is smooth, entire, showing a slight median longitudinal prominence : the peculiarly shortened muzzle of the Dicynodon strigiceps cannot be the effect of accidental fracture, for this would have carried away the fore-part of the alveolar border of the intermaxillary bone, and have left a vacuity between the lateral borders; but the anterior boundary of the palate is complete, fig. 3. This boundary does not describe so true a semicircle as in the Dicynodon testudiceps, but is semi-elliptic, being narrower across the commencing expansions, c, c, apparently of the alveoli, in proportion to the distance from that transverse line to the fore-part of the alveolar border. The reverse of this might have been expected from the extreme shortness of the muzzle, but it is due to the more posterior position of the thickened parts of the superior maxillary bones in the Dicynodon strigiceps. In the two preceding species the tusks project from beneath the fore-part of the orbit, or between this and the nasal opening: if the present species possessed the tusks, they must have projected opposite‘or from beneath the back part of the orbit, the floor of which is remarkably prolonged backwards and outwards; but the mutilation of the skull at this part has destroyed its true generic character. The pre-frontal bones are unusually developed, and descend lower than usual to form the anterior prominence of the orbits; the facial plates of the superior maxillary bones incline

inwards as they descend from the orbits: the lachrymal bones form the upper border of the nasal orifice, and the nasals, 15, and ascending intermaxillary bone, 19, form the anterior borders. The lateral branches of the intermaxillary bone form a thick convex inferior border bending in to the nasal aperture immediately above the alveolar edge: the facial plate of the superior maxillary, 20, slopes into the nasal cavity from behind. Although the present fragment, on which the Dicynodon strigiceps is founded, includes a smaller portion of the skull than that belonging to the Dicynodon testudiceps, the distinctive features of the species are more striking and more strongly marked: it ought perhaps to be referred, in the absence of decisive evidence of the maxillary tusks, to a distinct genus of Saurian reptile.
   A nodule of the dark hard matrix displays a portion of the middle part of the skull of a small species or the young of a Dicynodon, with the inserted base of both tusks (PI. VI. fig. 4.) ; these have the same circular transverse section, the same gentle curvature and oblique direction downwards and forwards as in the Dicynodon lacerticeps ; but the facial part of the skull, anterior to the alveoli of the tusks, appears to have been relatively deeper and longer, and to have been characterized by a ridge extending longitudinally, midway between the nasal and alveolar borders : I shall not, however, at present dwell upon further differential characters, as these are susceptible of being more satisfactorily determined by the removal of some of the adherent matrix, for which operation there has not yet been time. Sufficient has been removed from the base of the fang of one of the tusks, c, to have exposed the germ of a successional tooth had such existed, but of this there is no trace. The fang of the tooth retains the same size and shape to the base, which is excavated by a moderately deep, conical pulp-cavity.
DICYNODON BAINII.
   Two portions of the skull of a large Dicynodon exhibit each the base of a tusk, nearly two inches in diameter, the transverse section of which is subelliptical. A portion of the malo-maxillary bone with the beginning of the zygoma may be distinguished in one of these portions, but the specimens have been considerably crushed, distorted and fractured. The decomposition of the dentine of the tusk into concentric lamellae is well-displayed in one of these specimens. The regular subelliptical form of the tusk has not been produced by compression, but is evidently natural to the species, and distinguishes it from the foregoing smaller specimens.
I propose therefore to attach to this, the largest species of Dicynodon, the name of the discoverer, Mr. Bain.

SUMMARY.
   In reviewing the relations of the Dicynodonts to other Reptiles, recent and ex-
tinct, which have been elicited by the examinations and comparisons of the fossils
described in the foregoing pages, the result may be generally summed up as proving
the cranium, in this peculiar extinct genus or family, to have been organized ac-
cording to a type essentially Lacertian, but writh Crocodilian and Chelonian modi-
fications, and with very peculiar dicynodontal characters engrafted on that compo-
site basis.
   The Crocodilian structure is chiefly manifested in the occipital region of the skull,
and gives place to the Lacertian characters in the upper and fore-part; but in regard
to these deviations it must be remembered, that the distinctive features of the Cro-
codilian type are most broadly manifested in the existing representatives of the order,
and are modified and rendered less salient in the more numerous and varied extinct
members. Thus in the Teleosauri, the partial bony roof of the temporal fossse, formed
by the union of the post-frontal and mastoid, loses its broad development, and is re-
duced to the form of a slender column, which with the intermediate cranium is pro-
portionally longer than in the Gavials. This region of the skull is still longer in
the Pistosaurus, in which the parietal is perforated as in the Dicynodon and many
Lizards. The traces of the normal separate nasal apertures still exist in the Teleo-
sauri, at the point of convergence of the pre-frontal, lachrymal and superior maxil-
lary bones. In the Plesiosaurus the Lacertian character of the cranial bones, as a
decussating columnar framework, is more extensively displayed, and the two distinct
nostrils alone exist at the situation which I have termed ‘ normal5 in reference to
the great Saurian division of the Reptilian class, because of its prevalence in the
majority of the existing members, forming the Lacertian group of Sauria, and also
in the majority of the extinct members, which in other parts of their organization
are more nearly allied to the modern Loricata or Crocodiles.
   It is necessary to bear in mind this tendency to the amalgamation of Crocodilian
and Lacertian characters in the older Loricata, in order to form a right estimate of
the value of those correspondences with the cranial peculiarities of the existing
Lacertians which have before been detailed.
   Nevertheless, the characters of the occipital condyle, the position and division of
the nostrils, and above all, the condition and form of the intermaxillary bone, jus-
tify the conclusion, that the general type of cranial organization manifested by
modern Lizards was that on which the peculiar modifications of the Dicynodon
have been superinduced. It is not, however, amongst the modern Lizards that we
find the nearest approximation to the Dicynodon. For this we must go as far
back into the period of Reptilian existence as the epoch of the new red sand-

stone, when the Rhynchosaurus manifested the Lacertian type of skull combined with edentulous jaws, which most probably were sheathed with horn. But the Lacertian type is more closely adhered to in the Bhynchosaur than in the Dicynodon : as, for example, in the backward production from the upper angle of the orbit of the column or arch of bone, formed by the post-frontal and mastoid running parallel with the true zygoma, which is continued from the lower border of the orbit, as in the skull of the Rhynchocephalus (PI. YI. fig. 5.). For other instances of the Lacertian affinities of the Rhynchosaur, I must refer to the Memoir descriptive of that extinct genus*. It does not detract from the Lacertian character of the Rhynchosaur, that the slender curved and produced intermaxillary bones are double ; for the median suture still remains in the analogously, but less extensively produced intermaxillaries of the Rhynchocephalus above cited. What concerns us most in the present inquiry is the anomalous edentulous sharp edge of the upper and lower jaws in the ancient Rhynchosaur, and the Chelonian form of the deep lower jaw, the same anomaly having been repeated in the extinct African Lizard of apparently as remote a period, with the superaddition of Mammalian canine tusks. For the rest, however, much difference of form is manifested in the two extinct genera. Whilst the Rhynchosaur has the double, narrow and elongated intermaxillaries of the existing Rhynchocephalus, the Dicynodon presents the more usual undivided condition of that bone in the existing Lacertians, but with a much greater proportional development.
   It is interesting, however, to remark the same peculiar contraction of the cranial cavity, indicating an arrested development of brain in both genera of ancient La- certia. In the Rhynchosaur the temporal muscles met, and caused the development of a median crest of bone along the whole of the parietal bone. Secondary varieties which diversify the modern Lizards were also manifested by the two most ancient forms of the order. The difference in the intermaxillary bone has been already noticed. So with respect to the parietal bone : in the Rhynchosaur it is imperforate, as in Cyclodus and Gecko ; whilst in the Dicynodon it is perforated, as in Varanus. So likewise with respect to the mid-frontal bone: in the Rhynchosaur it is single, as in Thorictes and Iguana; whilst in the Dicynodon it is divided, as in Lacerta proper and Varanus : again, each post-frontal bone is divided by a suture in the Rhynchosaur, as in Iguana, but in the Dicynodon the postfrontal is undivided, as in most existing Lacertians. The facial part of the skull is as peculiarly compressed in the Rhynchosaur as it is expanded and abbreviated in the Dicynodons. The dental peculiarity of the African Saurian forms its chief distinction from the Rhynchosaurus, as from all other Sauria: but with the strange superaddition of its two canine tusks, we must bear in mind that the affinities * Cambridge Philosophical Transactions, vol. vii. part iii. p. 355.

linking the Dicynodon to Crocodilians and Chelonians are much more strongly manifested than they are in the Rhynchosaurus.
   Before concluding this summary, I cannot omit adverting to an analogy of structure which radiates from the Dicynodon in the direction of the Ophidian division of existing Reptiles, although it is unsupported by any other concordances of cranial or dental organization than those which I am about to cite. In the poisonous Serpents, the Rattle-snake, for example, the intermaxillary bone is single and edentulous ; the maxillary bone supports a long, curved, pointed tooth, which, when advanced, descends outside the lower jaw. Apart from all the other peculiarities of the maxillary and dental systems of the Poison-snakes, they alone, of all existing Reptiles, repeat, in the above-cited structures, the characters of the Dicynodon. But, in addition to the two large maxillary teeth, the Rattle-snake has smaller teeth in rows upon the palatine, pterygoid and mandibular bones. To complete the resemblance between the tusks of the Dicynodon and the venom fangs of the Snake, you must deeply groove their fore-part, or bore a canal through their centre; you must remove those strong columns of bone which converge to abut against and strengthen the fixed socket of the tusk, and you must suspend the maxillary bone by a moveable pedicle to the pre-frontal and malar bones. Besides, the perforated tusk of the poisonous Serpent is always followed by one or more similar teeth, in various stages of growth, ready to supply its place, according to the general law of the maintenance in serviceable state of the dental armature of the jaws throughout the Reptilian class.
   I have made various sections in fragmentary specimens, and have closely inspected every example of the Dicynodon where the alveoli of the tusks were exposed, in quest of the germs of successional teeth or tusks of reserve, but without success. From the youngest specimen with tusks of two lines diameter, to the largest with tusks of two inches diameter, in which their inserted part is exposed to the base, they alike exhibit a conical excavation of that base * for the lodgement of a persistent matrix, and are solid in the remainder of their extent. In consequence of the peculiarly complex structure discovered in the tusks and teeth of the Labyrinthodonts of the new red sandstone, I was very desirous, from the commencement of the present investigation, to submit the tissue of the great canines of the Dicynodons to microscopic examination, and, wTith the sanction of the President, I have had the requisite longitudinal and transverse sections prepared from fragmentary portions of skulls containing portions of these teeth.
   They offer no trace of the inflected labyrinthic folds of the capsule to which the characteristic ichthyic interblending of the cement and dentine in the teeth of the great Keuper Batrachian is due, but the microscopic specimens give additional evidence


of the true Saurian character of the Dicynodonts, by the close resemblance which they offer to the structure of the teeth of the Crocodile, Teleosaur and Plesiosaur.
   The canine tusk of the Dicynodon consists of a simple body of compact unvascular dentine, with a very thin outer coat of enamel, which may be traced into the alveolus for a short distance. Rather more than one-third of the tusk is lodged in the socket, the basal conical pulp-cavity is continued from the base about one-half down the implanted part of the tusk, and a linear continuation extends along the centre of the rest of the tusk. From this central line the dentinal tubes of the solid body of the tusk radiate; with a gentle curve at their beginning, convex towards the point of the tusk, and then proceeding straight to the periphery of the tooth ; not quite vertically to that surface, but slightly inclined downwards, or towards the apex. They present gentle parallel secondary curves or undulations throughout their course, divide dichotomously twice or thrice near their beginnings, and send off numerous small lateral branches, chiefly, but not exclusively, from the side next the apex. At their primary curve, near the centre of the tooth, the dentinal tubes measure i go both of an inch in diameter, and are separated by intervals of double that breadth, or 5 o doth °f an inch- They diminish in size as they approach the periphery of the dentine and terminate close to the enamel by dividing or breaking up into minute irregular ramuli. The dentinal cells are most conspicuous, as in the teeth of the Crocodile*, near the periphery of the tooth ; they are subhexagonal, and vary in diameter from gqjoth to a TiMJoth °f an inchf. The stratified arrangement of these cells in planes parallel with the surface of the tooth is very conspicuous, as in fossil teeth generally, from the partial decomposition of the basal tissue of the dentine. To the naked eye, or with a low power, this disposition of the dentinal cells gives the appearance of a concentrically-laminated structure of the dentine; the more highly organized and characteristic tubular structure demanding higher powers for its detection. The enamel, at least at the middle of the tusk, where I have examined it, is thinner than in the teeth of the Crocodile; it presents only a finely lamellated texture, the layers being parallel with the surface of the dentine on which it rests. There is only a fine linear trace of cement on the exterior of the sections of the implanted base of the tusks ; and here it is too thin to allow of the development of the radiated cells in its substance.
   The principal difference in the microscopic texture of the tusks of the Dicynodon. as compared with the teeth of the Crocodile, consists in the closer and more com

pact arrangement of the calcigerous tubes of the dentine; by which character it makes a closer approach to the intimate texture of that tissue in the canine teeth of the carnivorous Mammalia. I have shown, however, in my ‘ Odontography,’ that the teeth of the Crocodilian Reptiles which are implanted in sockets have the same essential type of structure as the simple teeth of the carnivorous Mammals. The difference consists of slight and secondary modifications of the minute tubular structure, and these disappear in the very remarkable teeth of the ancient extinct Sauria under consideration.
   In the other Reptilia, recent or extinct, which most nearly approach the Mammalia in the structure of their teeth, the difference characteristic of the inferior and cold-blooded class is manifested in the shape, and in the system of shedding and succession, of the teeth : the base of the implanted teeth seldom becomes consolidated, never contracted to a point, as in the fangs of the simple teeth of Mammalia, and at all periods of growth, one or more germs of teeth are formed within or near the base of the tooth in use, prepared to succeed it, and progressing towards its displacement. The dental armature of the jaws is kept in serviceable order by uninterrupted change and succession; but the matrix of the individual tooth is soon exhausted, and the life of the tooth itself may be said to be comparatively short.
   Hitherto I have not failed to obtain evidence of this low organized dental condition,—common to Fishesf,—in every Reptile, recent and extinct, in which I could examine the implanted base of the teeth.
   The existing Lacertians superadd to this endless shedding and succession of teeth, the ichthyic character of anchylosis of the base of the teeth in use to the osseous substance of the jaw; so that in the Rhynchocephalus and other Acrodont Lizards |, the teeth appear like small enamelled processes of the alveolar border. The Dicynodons not only manifest the higher type of free implantation of the base of the tooth in a deep and complete socket, common to Crocodilians, Mega- losaurs and Thecodonts, but make an additional and much more important step towards the Mammalian type of dentition by maintaining the serviceable state of the tusk by virtue of constant renovation of the substance of one and the same matrix, according to the principle manifested in the long-lived and ever-growing tusks and scalpriform incisors of the Mammalia. This endowment of the teeth of a Reptile is far more remarkable and unexpected than the more obvious character of the size and shape of the long exserted tusks themselves, superadded as they are, and in such strange combination, with the otherwise edentulous jawTs of a

Bird or Turtle. Yet if we consider the fact teleologically, or in its relations to the exigences and convenience of the living animal, the wisdom and beneficence of the principle is apparent, and the departure from the ordinary rule manifests a power transcending the trammels of scientific system. The teeth of the Dicy- nodon being but two in number, and their use to the animal indicated by their unusual size to be of unusual importance, the inconvenience and detriment that must have ensued from frequent shedding and replacement is very obvious; we may readily conceive it to have been incompatible with their functions, and therefore abrogated in favour of another mode of renovation which is abnormal in Reptiles, simply, perhaps, because the form, proportions and function of such tusks were unique, and are now no longer manifested in a cold-blooded class.
   Some observations may be naturally expected in reference to the probable use of the tusks to the Dicynodons, and the mode of life of those ancient and most remarkable Saurians. In the Mammalian class, where alone we now find the analogous instruments, tusks are usually given as weapons of offence and defence, —an office exemplified in the hornless Musk-deer, the Boar, and in the large canine teeth of the Carnivora. The Elephants use their tusks chiefly, though not exclusively, as lethal weapons: the Walrus is said to apply his tusks to aid in clambering over icebergs, as well as in combat and defence : the Dugong is supposed to wear the exserted points of the tusks in detaching fuci for food. Such an office at first suggests itself as a very probable one in regard to tusks descending, like those of the Dugong, from the upper jaw, and combined with edentulous and probably horny mandibles like those of a fucivorous Turtle.
   On inspecting the remains and the impressions of the tusks in the fossils under consideration, and especially in the almost entire skull of the Dicynodon lacerticeps, we perceive that these weapons are sharp-pointed, and present no trace of that obliquely beveled or chisel-shaped extremity which is produced by habitual application in acts of obtaining daily food, as, for example, in the protruded extremities of the tusks of the Dugong and the incisors of the Rodents. The tusks of the Dicynodon, though similar, in their origin from maxillary bones and downward direction, to the tusks of the Walrus, are so much shorter, at least in the single specimen in which their entire length is shown, that they could not be available in locomotion. I conclude therefore from their shape, proportional length, sharp points and dense texture, that the tusks of the Dicynodon were applied by the living animal either for the purpose of killing its prey, or of defending itself from its foes, or in both acts; and that they were offensive and defensive arms.
   A further insight into the habits and mode of life of the Dicynodons may reasonably be expected to follow the examination of the skeleton of the trunk and the organs of locomotion. This will form the subject of a subsequent memoir; but I

may here state, that the vertebra of the Dicynodon present the sub-biconcave structure common to most of the older extinct Saurians, which structure, in comparison with the ball and socket vertebrae of the modern species, indicates a more aquatic and perhaps marine theatre of life for the Amphibia that swarmed in such plenitude of development and diversity of forms during the ancient secondary periods of the geological history of this planet,,


