THE ample experience which Comparative Anatomists possess of the truth and tact with which the illustrious Cuvier formed his judgement of the nature and affinities of an extinct animal from an inspection of part, or even a single fragment of its skeleton, would justify our not attaching much weight to a conflicting opinion, maintained on mere theoretical grounds, and without actual inspection of the fossil itself; but when the accuracy of one of Cuvier’s interpretations is called in question by an anatomist so eminent as his successor in the chair of Comparative Anatomy, the confidence of geologists in their great guide in Palaeontology becomes liable to be shaken, and an examination into the validity of such objections is requisite.
   The doubts which M. de Blainville has published, as to the mammalian nature of the animals represented by the well-known fossil jaws discovered in the Stones- field oolite, rest,—first, on their being probably too imperfect to yield any conclusive evidence as to the class of animals to which they may have belonged ; and, secondly, on an interpretation of appearances presented by casts of these fossils leading to conclusions opposite to those which Cuvier, and afterwards M. Valenciennes, derived from an inspection of the actual fossils.
   It is in compliance chiefly with Dr. Buckland’s request that I have undertaken to test the validity of these doubts, for which purpose he has transmitted to me from Oxford the two original fossils, each consisting of the ramus, or lateral half of a lower jaw ; I have also re-examined the similar, but larger and more perfect fossil, described by Mr. Broderip, and, since, liberally presented by that gentleman to the British Museum.
   And first, with reference to the condition of these specimens, I am justified in stating, unequivocally, that each and all of them are sufficiently complete to furnish grounds to any anatomist, conversant with the established generalizations in Comparative Osteology, for determining therefrom the class, if not also the more restricted group of animals to which they have belonged.
   Cuvier, after an examination of one of the jaws from Dr. Buckland’s collection, pronounced “the animal tohave been mammiferous, resembling an Opossum, although of an extinct genus, and differing from all known Carnivorous Mammalia in having ten molar teeth in a series in the lower jawf.” It is to be regretted, that, with the exception of the number of molar teeth, Cuvier did not specify the particulars on which he founded his belief that the jaw in question represented a new but extinct genus of mammalian, and probably marsupial quadrupeds.
   This specimen, however, plainly exhibits,—first, a convex articular condyle (a) ;—secondly, an indubitable and well-defined impression of what was once a broad, thin, high, and slightly recurved triangular coronoid process (&), rising immediately anterior to the condyle, having its basis extended over the whole of the interspace between the condyle and the commencement of the molar series, and having a vertical diameter equal to that of the horizontal ramus of the jaw itself;—thirdly, the angle of the jaw (c) continued to nearly the same extent below the condyle as the coronoid process reaches above it, and its apex is continued backwards in the form of a process;—fourthly, the parts above-described forming one continuous portion with the horizontal ramus of the jaw, which is not compounded of three or four distinct pieces. It is true, with respect to the last proposition, that an inferior marginal groove has been considered as evidence of the composite structure of the jaw under consideration ; but there is no other mark that could be interpreted as an indication of this reptilian structure, whilst a similar groove characterizes the lower jaw of the marsupial Myrmecobius and Wombat, and of some large species of Sorex.
   Now these points, which may be presumed to have influenced Cuvier in forming his opinion of the nature of the fossil in question, are precisely those which arrested the attention of M. Valenciennes, when he examined the fossil itself, and which he has ably advanced in his endeavour to dissipate the doubts expressed by M. de Blainville.
   Whence then, it may be asked, is the necessity of again describing these appearances, and of again urging their importance as evidence of the mammiferous nature of the Stonesfield jaw ? It arises from the circumstance that the Professor of Comparative Anatomy at the Jardin des Plantes has declared, after an inspection of casts of the fossil examined by Cuvier and Valenciennes, that these anatomists have been deceived in all those points. M. de Blainville {loc. cit.) asserts that there is no trace of a convex condyle, but that, in its place, there exists an articular fissure, somewhat as in the jaws of Fishes ; that the teeth, instead of being imbedded in sockets, have their fangs confluent with, or anchylosed to, the substance of the jaws ; and that the jaw itself presents evident traces of the composite structure.
   The point, therefore, which first demands our closest attention, is the actual condition in the Stonesfield fossils of the articular or condyloid process. Now it is scarcely necessary to observe, that the condyle of a lower jaw, independently of any other part, is sufficient to indicate whether it belongs to a mammiferous or oviparous animal. In the Mammalia it is convex or flat, in all Ovipara it is concave ; in the fossil Stonesfield jaw examined by Cuvier (PI. V. fig. 3), in the second specimen of the same species examined by M. Valenciennes, and in the lower jaw of another genus (PI. VI. fig. 2), described and figured by Mr. Broderip, a prominent, convex, articular condyle is more or less distinctly revealed. It is most entire and unequivocal in Mr. Broderip’s specimen, which I shall subsequently describe. What M. de Blainville has mistaken for an articular fissure—“ une sorte d’echancrure articulaire un peu comme dans les poissons,”—must be the entering angle or notch either above or below the true articular condyle.
   In Plate II. fig. 1 of the Bridgewater Treatise of Dr. Buckland, this important part of the structure of the jaw is very accurately represented. The figure also of the jaw of the Thylacotherium, given by M. Prevost in the Annales des Sciencesf, is by no means “tout-k-fait inexacte,” as asserted by M. de Blainville ; but the form of the condyle is less completely displayed in this fossil than in the second specimen of Thylacotherium Prevostii, Val. (PI. V. fig. 1). Although mutilated in both, what remains is situated in a line parallel with the crowns of the teeth, and projects beyond the vertical line dropped from the extremity of the coronoid process.
   In the example examined by Cuvier, the form and extent of the coronoid process is indicated in a very clear and well-defined manner by the impression which it has left upon the matrix.
   Now the coronoid process of the Opossum’s jaw is plane on its inner surface, but slightly convex on the outer surface, the anterior margin of the process being produced externally in the form of a smooth convex ridge ; and both this ridge and the shallow depression behind it, are accurately represented in the impression which this portion of the jaw has left on the matrix in which it was imbedded. 
A similar impression would be made by the outer side of the coronoid process of the Mole’s jaw, but not by that of any known reptile or fish.
   In the Opossum’s jaw it will be likewise perceived that a depression is continued forwards and slightly downwards from the condyle of the jaw to the foramen of the dental artery and nerve : in the fossil a corresponding depression of the jaw has left a convex elevation of the matrix, leading likewise from the condyle to the dental foramen ; but this foramen, in the Thylacotherium, is situated relatively more forwards than in the Didelphys.
   What therefore might at first sight seem to be an imperfection in the present fossil, affords in reality an additional clue for tracing out its true affinities. The fossil resembles the Didelphys in the breadth, the height, and the direction of the coronoid process ; but, among the placental Insectivores, the Gymnurus Rafflesii sufficiently resembles in these particulars the present Stonesfield fossils, to prevent undue stress being laid upon the modifications of the coronoid process as indicative of their marsupial affinities.
   The simple structure of the jaw of the Thylacothere, its convex prominent condyle, and the process continued backwards from the angle of the jaw, have been adduced by M. Valenciennes as establishing the truth of Cuvier’s opinion of the nature of that extinct animal; and we have seen that all the fossils hitherto discovered justify such support. But these anatomical facts only go to prove the mammiferous and carnivorous, and not the marsupial character of the Thylacotherium : there is however a constant modification of the angle of the jaw, recognised by Cuvier* as peculiar to the family of Opossums (Pedimanes), and which I have found to characterize, not only that family, but all the marsupials hitherto discovered, and to distinguish them from their nearest congeners in the placental series: this character has not been taken into consideration in the inquiry into the nature of the present fossils by any of the able anatomists who have written respecting them, although, if co-existing with a convex condyle, it would be strong evidence of the marsupial nature of a fossil jaw, even if all the teeth were wanting.
   In the carnivorous Marsupials, as the Thylacine, for instance, the lower maxillary bone resembles, in many respects, that of the corresponding species in the placental series, as the Dog : a similar transverse condyle is placed low down near the angle of the jaw; a broad and strong coronoid process rises high above the condyle, and is slightly curved backwards; there is the same well-marked depression on the exterior of the ascending ramus for the firm implantation of the temporal muscle; and the lower boundary of this depression is formed by a strong ridge extended downward and forward from the outside of the condyle. But in the Dog and other placental Carnivores (the Seals excepted), a process, representing the angle of the jaw, extends directly backwards from the middle of the above ridge, which process gives precision and force to the articulation of the jaw, and increases the power by which the masseter acts upon the jaw. Now, although the same curved ridge of bone bounds the lower part of the external muscular depression of the ascending ramus in all the Marsupialia, it does not in any of them send backwards, or in any other direction, a process corresponding to that just described in the Dog and other placental Carnivora. The angle of the jaw itself, in the Marsupials, is bent inwards in the form of a process, encroaching in various shapes and degrees of development, in the different marsupial genera, upon the interspace of the rami of the lower jaw. In looking directly upon the lower edge of the jaw, we see, therefore, in place of the margin of a vertical plate of bone, a more or less flattened triangular surface or plate of bone extended between the external ridge and the internal process or inflected angle. In the Opossums this internal angular process is triangular and trihedral, directed inwards, with the point slightly curved upwards, and more produced in the small than in the large species. In the Dasyures it has a similar form, but the apex is extended into an obtuse process. In the Perameles it forms a still longer process of a flattened form, extended obliquely inwards and backwards, and slightly curved upwards. It presents a triangular, slightly incurved and pointed form in the Petaurists, in which it is longest and weakest in the Pigmy species (Acrobates, Desm.). In the Potoroos and Phalangers the process is broad, with the apex slightly developed. It is bent inwards, and bounds the lower part of a wide and deep depression in the inside of the ascending ramus. In the great Kangaroo the internal margin of this process is curved upwards, so as to augment the depth of the internal depression above-mentioned. The internal angular process arrives at its maximum of development in the Wombat, so that the breadth of the base of the ascending ramus very nearly equals the height of the same part.
  Now if the process from the angle of the jaw in the Stonesfield fossil be actually continued backwards, as M. Valenciennes describes, in the axis, or nearly so, of the ramus of the jaw, then such fossil would resemble the jaw of an ordinary placental carnivorous or insectivorous mammal, and the term Thylacotherium would be inappropriately applied to it; but in both the specimens of the fossil jaws to which that name has been restricted, and which present their inner or mesial surfaces to the observer, the angular process presents a fractured surface ; and we are led to conclude, therefore, that -when the jaw was entire its angle was produced inwards or mesially ; but whether to the same extent as in the Opossum and other Marsupials, or with a slight inclination, as in the Mole and Hedgehog, cannot be certainly determined in the present fossils. In these specimens, however, the apex of the angle only is fractured; while in the fossil described by Mr. Broderip, the entire process, and consequently the angle of the jaw, which in the Marsupials constitutes this process, is broken away: in this jaw, likewise, the gentle convex line, continued from the condyle into the lower margin of the horizontal ramus of the jaw, is uninterrupted, precisely as in the jaw of the Marsupial (Dasyurus viverrinas) now on the table, in which I have broken away, in a similar manner, the inwardly produced angle. In the fossils, something which projected inwards has evidently been broken off. The very circumstance of the angular process projecting inwards beyond the plane of the ramus of the jaw, would render it most liable to be broken off when the matrix came to be detached from the inner surface of the jaw; whereas, if it had been simply continued backwards, it might have been preserved entire ; but this has not been the case in any of the fossils hitherto obtained from Stonesfield.
   These appearances, in conjunction with the condyloid and coronoid processes forming parts of one simple, continuous, undivided plate of bone, would be sufficient to determine, not only the mammiferous, but the carnivorous, and to strongly indicate, in the Phascolotherium at least (PI. VI. fig. 2), the marsupial nature of the Stonesfield fossils, if even every tooth and alveolar process had been destroyed.
   Nevertheless, in a question of so much interest in the problem of the order of appearance of animated beings on our planet, it is well that these parts also are present, and in sufficiently good preservation in the fossils in question to yield important auxiliary proofs of their mammiferous, if not marsupial nature.
   M. de Blainville alludes to a careful drawing of one of these jaws which represented the posterior molars as having “la forme en palmette, quinquelobee,” a form which he observes is sufficient to expel them not only from the marsupial but the mammiferous series. To this it may be replied, that certain species of Seal, both recent and fossil, might, for the same reason, be argued to be non-mammalian.
   The following is the exact condition of the teeth in the specimen of the Thylacotherium examined by Cuvier (PI. V. fig. 3) :—there are ten molars in situ, each with two fangs imbedded, as the seven anterior molars show, in deep and distinct sockets; there is an evident trace of the sockets of another molar anterior to those in place.
   The molars very gradually increase in size from the first or anterior one to the sixth in the present specimen; the rest are equal, except the last, which is somewhat smaller. The crowns of all the grinders, except the second, third and fourth,
are vertically split, and more or less of their internal grinding surface is broken away.
   The tenth molar presents only the inner side of the middle external cusp, with part of the anterior cusp ; a similar appearance would be produced in the true molar of a Didelphys, if the internal middle cusp and the posterior cusps were obliquely sliced away.
   In the ninth molar the large middle external cusp is nearly entire to its sharp apex ; part of the anterior cusp and the base of the internal posterior cusp are preserved : the same appearances would be produced in the true molar of a Didelphys, if the middle internal cusp and part of the anterior and posterior internal cusps had been obliquely truncated.
   In the eighth tooth the fractured surface of the crown gives a view of the anterior and large middle external cusp, with part of the posterior external cusp.
   In the seventh tooth the crown is more mutilated than in the preceding teeth ; only a part of the anterior cusp and the base of the external cusp are visible ; but the fracture displays the breadth of the crown, and corroborates the evidence afforded by the preceding teeth, and confirmed beyond question by the posterior molar of the second jaw (PI. V. fig. 1), that these posterior molars were not provided, as M. de Blainville asserts, with mere compressed, five-lobed crowns.
   In the sixth tooth the evidence of the complicated structure of the crown becomes indistinct: part of a large anterior and small posterior cusp are alone visible.
   In the fifth tooth two similar cusps are present, hut the points are broken.
   The crowns of the fourth, third and second grinders are perfect, and clearly show that they are each divided into two, and not three, sub-compressed conical cusps, the posterior one being very much less than the other: these teeth precisely resemble the second and third false molars of the lower jaw in the Mole, as well as in some species of Didelphys. I cannot perceive the tricuspid structure given to these teeth in the figure in the Bridgewater Treatise of the jaw now described; that of M. Prevost in the Annales des Sciences is more exact in this particular, at least as regards the third tooth in place.
   The minute cylindrical medullary canal (cavitas pulpi) is plainly visible in the anterior fang of both the second, third, fourth and fifth molars.
   The crowns of the first and second premolars in the present specimen are broken vertically like the posterior teeth ; but sufficient of the crown is preserved in both to show that it was unequally bicuspid, as in the two succeeding false molars.
   The anterior false molars are altogether displaced; but traces of the alveoli, for the two short fangs of one of these, may be perceived at the broken anterior extremity of the present fossil.
   The double fangs of the seven anterior molars in place are exposed by the breaking away of the internal plate of the ramus of the jaw: in the three following molars the beginning of the fangs are visible, slightly protruded from their sockets. The fangs extend half way through the vertical diameter of the ramus ; their dense ivory is clearly contrasted both by its texture and deeper colour from the surrounding bone: so far from being anchylosed to this bone, as M. De Blainville asserts, they are clearly separated from it by a thin layer of a distinct colour from either, and which appears to be due to the matrix which has insinuated itself into the sockets of the teeth, as it has into the vascular canals of the jaw.
   Lastly, it must be obvious to all who inspect this fossil and compare it with the jaw of a small Didelphys, that, contrary to the assertion of M. de Blainville, the teeth and their fangs are arranged with as much regularity in the one as in the other ; and that instead of an argument in favour of the saurian nature of the fossil being afforded by this part of its structure, the distinct sockets and their double cavities, corresponding with the long and slender double fangs of the teeth, are conclusive against the saurian theory.
   I proceed next to the description of the second specimen of the half-jaw of Thylacotherium, Prevostii in Dr. Buckland’s collection (PI. V. fig. 1) : this agrees in size and form with the preceding. Such teeth as are preserved in it, agree with the corresponding ones in the previous specimen : there can be no doubt that they both belonged to mature individuals of the same species and the same size. M. Valenciennes, after an inspection of this second example, declared it to be the left ramus of the lower jaw, having its internal side exposed to view : he founded his opinion on the presence of the orifice of the dental canal near one end, and of the articular surface of the symphysis at the other.
   M. de Blainville, after an inspection of the casts of this example, came to a contrary opinion; he denies the existence of the orifice of the dental canal and of the symphysial articulation, and describes the specimen in question as being the external side of a compound jaw with an articular notch, like that of a fish or reptile. It has become necessary, therefore, again to subject this specimen to a severe scrutiny; and M. Valenciennes will pardon me for reiterating facts which he has so ably and accurately described, when he reflects that the progress of geological truth and the establishment of a sound theory of the succession of animal development in this planet would be impeded, if the doubts, cast upon his statements by so able an anatomist as his learned colleague, should remain untested by a second appeal to the specimen itself.
   In this specimen the whole of the exposed surface of the lower jaw, with the exception of the coronoid, articular and angular processes, is entire; the smooth surface near the anterior extremity of the jaw is in bold relief, and slopes away at nearly a right angle from the rougher articular surface of the elongated symphysis. It may be supposed that this symphysial articular surface (PL V. fig. 1, e), which at once determines the side of the jaw, might be obscured in a plaster-cast, but there is no possibility of mistaking it in the fossil itself; it is long and narrow, and is continued forwards in the same line with the gently convex inferior margin of the jaw, which thus tapers gradually to a pointed anterior extremity, precisely as in the jaws of the Didelphys, as well as in other Insectivora, both of the marsupial and placental series. Its lower margin presents a small but pretty deep notch, which possesses every appearance of a natural structure ; and a corresponding hut shallower notch is present in the same part of the jaw of the Myrmecohius. In the relative length of the symphysis, its form and position, the jaw of the Thylacotherium corresponds with that of the Didelphys, Myrmecohius, and Gymnurus. A greater proportion of the convex articular condyle is preserved in this than in the foregoing specimen, and it projects backward to a greater extent. The precise contour of the coronoid process is not so neatly defined in this as in the first specimen of Thylacotherium, but sufficient remains to show that it had the same height and width.
   The exposed surface of the coronoid process is slightly convex : had it been the outer side, as M. de Blainville asserts, it would have been concave. The surface of the ascending ramus of the jaw is entire above the angle, whence we may conclude, that if the process from the latter part had been continued directly backwards, it would also have been entire ; but the extremity of the angular process is broken off, proving it to have originally inclined inwards, or towards the observer: as, however, the greater part of the angle (c) is entire, it could not have been inflected to the same extent as in the Didelphys, Dasyurus, or the Phascolotherium, next to be described. A groove is extended from the lower end of the articular condyle forward to the orifice of the canal for the dental artery, where it divides ; the upper branch terminates in the dental orifice ; the lower and larger division (d) is continued forward near the lower margin of the jaw, and is gradually filled up half way towards the symphysis :—no one could mistake this smooth vascular groove for an articular fissure. There is a broader and shorter groove in the corresponding part of the jaw of the Myrmecohius, and a narrower groove in that of the Wombat. The alveolar wall of the posterior grinders makes a convex projection, characteristic of the inner surface of the ramus of the lower jaw. The posterior grinder in the present jaw is fortunately more complete than in the first example, and shows a small, middle, internal cusp, with part of a large external cusp, both projecting from the crown of the tooth in nearly the same transverse line. The enamel covering the internal cusp, which is vertically fractured, is beautifully distinct from the ivory, and considerably thicker in proportion to the size of the tooth than is the enamel or its analogue in the teeth of any species of Reptile, recent or fossil. The six molars, anterior to the one in place, are broken off close to the sockets; both the fifth and fourth false molars are entire : the anterior cusp has the same superior size, as in the first specimen. The thick enamel coating, and the silky iridescent lustre of the compact ivory, are beautifully shown in these teeth.
   The third and second grinders are more fractured than in the first specimen, but sufficient remains to show that they possess the same form and relative size ; but the most interesting evidence, as regards the teeth, which the present jaw affords, is the existence of the sockets of not less than seven teeth, anterior to those above described. Of these sockets the four anterior ones are small and simple, like those of the Mole, being more equal in their size and interspaces than in the Di- delphys. The fifth socket contained a small premolar with double fangs, and so likewise the sixth and seventh. Thus the two false molars, with perfect crowns in the present specimen, are the eighth and ninth teeth, counting backwards, or the fourth and fifth of their class, viz. premolares, or false molars.
   Thus, as regards the genus Thylacotherium, we have now evidence that its dental formula must include thirty-two molars in the lower jaw,—sixteen on each side: that these, instead of presenting an uniform compressed tricuspid structure, and being all of one kind, must be divided into three series, as regards their form : five, if not six, of the posterior teeth are quinque-cuspidate, and must be regarded as molares veri. Some of the molares spurii are tricuspid and some bicuspid, as in the Opossums ; but they are six, if not seven, in number: anterior to these are four simple teeth, of which the fourth may be regarded as the representative of the canine, and the anterior three as incisors. Thus the Thylacotherium differs considerably from the genus Didelphys in the number of its teeth : indeed, at the time when Cuvier wrote, no mammiferous ferine quadruped was known to possess more molar teeth than the Chrysochlore, which has nine molars on each side of the upper jaw, and eight molars on each side of the lower jaw.
   The Chrysochlore, however, is not the only Mammal in which the molars exceed the number usually found in the unguiculate Mammalia.
   In the Transactions of the Zoological Society for the year 1836, Mr. Waterhouse published a description of an Australian Marsupial, forming the type of a new genus {Myrmecobius), and having nine molars on each side of the lower jaw, besides one small canine and three simple conical incisors.
   The teeth of Thylacotherium moreover differ from those of Didelphys not only in number but also in size, being relatively smaller. The teeth of Myrmecobius, besides their approximation in number to those of Thylacotherium, resemble them in their small relative size more than do those of Didelphys; but they are still smaller than in Thylacotherium, which, in this respect as well as in the structure of the teeth, holds an intermediate position between Didelphys and Myrmecobius. And it is interesting to find that the recent Mammal, which thus approaches most nearly the extinct Thylacotherium, should exhibit in the structure of its lower jaw, and of the articular cavity for the same, unequivocal evidence of its belonging to the marsupial family.
   The Didelphys Prevostii being evidently, as Cuvier stated, a genus distinct from Didelphys, properly so called, and as great inconvenience arises in applying to it that name in the Linnsean sense, or as an equivalent to the term Marsupialis,—in which sense alone it has ever been so applied by the naturalists of this country,— M. Valenciennes has added to the value of his examination of the present fossil by proposing for it a distinct generic appellation. It would have been more prudent, perhaps, to have chosen one less descriptive than ‘ Thylacotherium,’ since the affinities of the fossil Insectivore to the marsupial order may be regarded as indicated only with a certain degree of probability, and as requiring further evidence before the desired demonstration can be attained. The determination of the particular order of Mammals to which the animal represented by these ancient remains is referrible, is a matter, however, of little moment, compared to the discovery of the class of vertebrate animals to which it belonged. In reference to this point, the evidence afforded by the two jaws, above described, decisively proves, in my opinion, that they belonged to a true, warm-blooded, mammiferous species, referrible also to the higher or unguiculate division of the class Mammalia, and to an insectivorous genus; with a probability, according to the present known fossils, of the marsupial character of such genus.
   At a subsequent Meeting I propose to bring forward my observations on the more perfect fossil half-jaw, described by Mr. Broderip under the name of Didelphys Bucklandi, and of which the marsupial character is more strongly manifested.
   As this, however, like the Thylacotherium, is generically distinct from the modern genus Didelphys, I shall describe it under the name of Phascolotherium Bucklandi.
   
