IF the question of the existence of the remains of animals so highly organized as Mammalia, in the Stonesfield oolite, depended only on the evidence afforded by the half-jaws of the Thylacotherium described at a previous Meeting of the Geological Society, that evidence, I have contended, is amply sufficient to enable the anatomist to answer that question in the affirmative.
   The remains of the split condyles in these fossils demonstrate their original convex form,—a form which is diametrically opposite to that which characterizes the same part in all Reptiles, and, indeed, in all Ovipara. The size, the figure, and the position of the coronoid process are such as have never yet been witnessed in any other than a zoophagous mammal, with a temporal muscle sufficiently developed to demand so extensive an attachment for the purpose of working a destructive carnivorous jaw.
   The teeth are composed of dense ivory, with crowns covered with a thick coat of enamel; they are everywhere distinct from the substance of the jaw, and those of the molar series have two fangs, deeply imbedded in distinct sockets. These teeth are, moreover, of three kinds: the hinder ones are bristled with five cusps, of which four seem to have been placed in pairs transversely across the crown of the tooth. The anterior ones present a very different form, and have but two or three cusps in the same plane; the four anterior teeth were simple, and each with a single fang. Now these particulars have never yet been found united in the teeth of any other than a zoophagous mammiferous quadruped. The general form of the jaw corresponds with the more essential indications of its mammiferous nature just described.
   The Thylacotherium being thus established in its true position as regards the primary divisions of the Vertebrate sub-kingdom, there next remained to be detected such secondary characters as might reveal the affinities of the fossil to some of the minor groups of the zoophagous and insectivorous Mammalia ; and such seemed to be indicated by the fractured angle of the jaw. But the evidence that may be drawn from this appearance is not so clear and convincing as that which relates to the first and main argument.
   Many naturalists and anatomists may concede the mammiferous character of the Thylacotherium, but may require further evidence in proof of its marsupial nature.

Still I must repeat, that the jaws of theThylacothere, as at present known, resemble those of the small Opossums more closely than any other group of the mammiferous class ; and in the number of the teeth, the Australian genus Myrmecobius offers the nearest approach to them.
   It is, however, comparatively of little consequence to what particular order of Mammals the Stonesfield jaws belong, provided it can be certainly proved from them that they do belong to the class Mammalia.
   The announcement of the fact of mammiferous remains in the oolitic formations, as it invalidated a received and general proposition relative to the first appearance of these remains in the component strata of the earth’s crust, gave rise, in the minds of those philosophers who were unwilling to modify the general law so as to include the new fact, in the first place to doubts as to the antiquity of the matrix; and afterwards, when these doubts could no longer be maintained, to a denial of the high organization of the fossils.
   With respect to the fossils themselves it is asserted,—
   1st. That they are too imperfect to support any safe conclusion as to the class of Vertebrates to which they belonged ; and that therefore, since all previous experience is contrary to the existence of mammiferous remains below the chalk or anterior to the Eocene period, the cold-blooded Ovipara ought to have the benefit of the doubt, and the fossils in question should be transferred to their low organized community.
   The answer to this objection, which is founded on a view of casts only, is simply an appeal to the fossils themselves; the result of which has already been given as regards the Thylacotherium.
   2nd. These natural hieroglyphics, though considerably time-worn, being allowed to be sufficiently entire to give, if rightly interpreted, the date of the strata on which they are inscribed, we have to consider the differences of opinion as to their real form and meaning. In other words, the objections to the mammiferous nature of the Stonesfield jaws rest not only on a difference of opinion as to their actual structure, but also on a different interpretation of admitted appearances.
   It is asserted that the jaws in question must belong to the cold-blooded Vertebrates, because the articular surface is in the form of an entering angle. My answer to this has been, that the articular surface is supported on a prominence, and that that prominence is convex; and that a convex condyle is met with in no other class of Vertebrata, save in the Mammalia.
   It is asserted, again, that the teeth are all of an uniform structure, as in certain reptiles. But this argument, in like manner, falls to the ground on reference to the fossils themselves ; the contrary being the fact, and the actual structure of the teeth strongly supporting the mammiferous theory of the fossils.
   We have next to consider those arguments which have been founded on admitted structures.
   The advocate of the mammiferous nature of the Stonesfield Thylacothere allows that it has an unusual number of molar teeth, it may be twelve, true and false, on each half of the lower jaw ; but he denies the inference, that, therefore, this halfjaw has not belonged to a Mammal. There is not sufficient constancy in the number of the teeth in the Mammalia, or even in the carnivorous or insectivorous subdivisions of that class, to render the excess of teeth in the Thylacothere of any value as an indication of its classial relations. Among the placental Carnivora the Canis Megalotis has constantly one more grinder on each side of the lower jaw than the usual number. Among the Insectivora the Chrysochlore has also eight instead of seven molars in each ramus of the lower jaw. Among the Marsupiata the genus Myrmecobius has nine molars on each side of the lower jaw. Some of the insectivorous Armadillos and of the zoophagous Cetacea offer examples of a combination of still more numerous and reptile-like teeth, with all the true and essential characters of the mammiferous class. The anatomist, contending for the saurian nature of the Stonesfield jaws, must have felt the weakness of his cause when he appealed to the number of the teeth in that fossil for its support.
   All the spurious molars of the Thylacotherium have two well-developed fangs : but this fact has also been adduced as an objection to the Cuvierian determination of that extinct animal. The greater number of the spurious molars, however, in every genus of the placental Ferre, have two fangs, and in the marsupial Mammalia, as well as in the Mole, and some other Insectivora, the whole of the false molars invariably possess two fangs, and this structure as little co-exists with a complicated crown of the tooth as in the extinct Thylacothere.
   If the ascending ramus of the Stonesfield jaws had been absent, and with it the evidence of their mammiferous nature afforded by the condyloid, coronoid and angular processes,—the structure of the teeth, and especially the implantation of the molars in distinct sockets by means of long double fangs, would, nevertheless, have yielded proof that the fossils in question were the remains of a species referrible to the highest class of animals. Since a Shark’s tooth is never implanted in a socket, its form, whether it have a bifurcate base or not, cannot afford any argument for the non-mammalian nature of the Thylacotherium : the saurian nature of the so-called Basilosaurus is too problematical for the attachment of any value to an objection founded on the two-fanged structure of its teeth.
   When also it is recollected that Cuvier described and figured (after Garriga) the teeth of the Megatherium as having two fangs, and when the origin of that mistake is kept in view, the anatomist, anxious after truth, would pause before he accepted the reputed structure of the molars of the Basilosaurus as valid proof of so anomalous an exception to the condition of the teeth characteristic of the class Reptilia, if even the Basilosaur should prove to be a true Saurian. In the teeth of the Megatherium the appearance of the double fang was produced by an accidental fracture in the axis of the tooth, displaying the two converging sides of the simple conical cavity, which, as in the teeth of the larger Saurians, occupies the base of the really simple and fangless tooth of the Megathere.
   Until, therefore, the teeth of the Basilosaurus shall have been examined with a view to the possibility of this mistake, and their size, form and relations to the jaws have been described, the simple statement that such an extinct animal had teeth with double fangs, can have little force against the argument for the mam- miferous nature of the Thylacothere, founded on the structure of its teeth.
   The objection to the mammiferous character of the Thylacothere founded on the colour of the fossil, as indicative of a proportion of animal matter originally therein present, and presumed to be such as is found only in the cold-blood Vertebrata, will have but little weight with the geologist practically acquainted with fossil remains. The dentine of the Mastodon’s grinders commonly exhibits a colour much more nearly approaching to jet black than is presented by any tooth of the Thylacothere. On the other hand, there are numerous fossils of both reptiles and fishes, which, from the accident of their matrix, offer evidence of a much less original proportion of the animal matter than is conjecturally assigned to those of the Thylacothere.
   There remain then for discussion the arguments for the saurian nature of the Stonesfield fossils, founded on the appearance of a compound structure observable in them.
   As these appearances are more numerous and imposing in the jaw of the Phascolotherium about to be described, I have reserved their consideration to the present opportunity, repeating only, with respect to the Thylacothere, that the only trace of this structure in the jaw of that fossil is due to a mere vascular groove running along its lower margin ; and that a similar structure is present in the lower jaw of some species of the Opossum, in the Wombat, Myrmecobius, and in that of the Sorex Indicus and of other Mammalia.
Description of the Half-jaw of Phascolotherium Bucklandi. 
    The fossil on which this genus is founded Is the right ramus of the lower jaw, having its external surface imbedded in the oolitic matrix, and its inner or mesial surface exposed to the observer. It is the fossil described and figured by Mr. Broderip in the Third Volume of the Zoological Journal (PI. XI.), in which its generic distinction from the Stonesfield fossils of Thylacotherium is distinctly pointed out, and the name of Didelphys Bucklandi given to it only ‘for the sake of convenience and perspicuity;’ the word Didelphys being here used in its widest sense, and the author expressly stating that it would perhaps be presumptuous in him to pronounce on its generic identity with the group of Marsupials, to which the term Didelphys is restricted by Cuvier.
   In presenting another description of this interesting fossil to the scientific world, I have to offer the same apology to Mr. Broderip as to M. Valenciennes, in reference-to the Thylacotherium. And the imposition of a distinct generic name on the Didelphys Prevostii by MM. Agassiz*, de Blainville and Valenciennes, has, in some measure, compelled me to take the same step in reference to the Didelphys Buchlandi, since I shall be able to prove in the sequel, that this fossil offers characters which distinguish it generically, not only from the Didelphys Prevostii or Thylacotherium, as Mr. Broderip has already pointed out, but also from the true genus Didelphys of modern Mammalogists, to which, nevertheless, it has a much nearer affinity.
   The condyle of the jaw of the Phascolotherium here described (PI. VI. fig. 2. a.), instead of being vertically split, as in the specimens of Thylacotherium, is fortunately entire, and stands out in bold relief from the oolitic matrix ; it presents exactly the same form and degree of convexity as in the genera Didelphys and Dasyurus. In its relative position to the series of molar teeth, with which it is on a level, it corresponds with Dasyurus more nearly than with Didelphys : in the Dasyurus ursinus, in fact, as well as in the allied marsupial genus, Thylacinus, the condyle has precisely the same relative position to the molar series; so that this particular structure in the jaw of the Phascolotherium affords no argument against its admission into the marsupial series.
   The general form and proportions of the coronoid process (6.) resemble those in the zoophagous Marsupials ; but in the depth and form of the entering notch, between this process and the condyle, it corresponds most closely with the Thylacinus.
   It is, indeed, a most interesting fact, that this rare and solitary genus, represented by a single species (the Hyaena of the Tasmanian colonists), whose term of existence seems fast waning to its close, should afford the only example of a form and backward extension of the coronoid process, and a corresponding deep emargination above the condyle, which would else exclusively characterize the ancient Phascolotherium.
     
   The base of the inwardly-bent angle of the lower jaw progressively increases in Didelphys, Dasyurus and Thylacinus ; and, judging from the fractured surface of the corresponding part in the fossil, it also resembles most nearly, in this respect, the Thylacinus.
   The condyle of the jaw is nearer the plane of the inferior margin of the ramus in the Thylacine than in the Dasyures or Opossums ; and consequently, when the inflected angle is broken off, the curve of the line continued from the condyle along the lower margin of the jaw in the Thylacine is least: in this particular again the Phascolothere resembles the Thylacine. In the position of the dental foramen, the Phascolothere, like the Thylacothere, differs from all the zoophagous Marsupials already cited, and also from the placental Fer; but in the Potoroo (Hypsiprymnus), a marsupial Herbivore, the orifice of the dental canal is situated, as in the Stonesfield Marsupials, very near the vertical line, dropped from the last molar tooth. 
   A portion of the inner wall of the jaw, near its anterior margin, in the Phascolothere, has been violently broken off, so that the form of the symphysis cannot be precisely determined ; but in the gentle curve by which the lower margin of the jaw is continued along the line of the symphysis to the anterior extremity of the jaw, the Phascolotherium resembles Didelphys more than Dasyurus or Thylacinus.
   It is interesting to find that this analogy is associated with a correspondence in the condition of the teeth at the anterior part of the jaw. In examining the fossil we can scarcely refuse our assent to Mr. Broderip’s opinion, that there were originally four incisors in each ramus of the jaw of Phascolotherium, as in Didelphys. Of the three incisors which are actually present in the fossil, only the internal and posterior surfaces are displayed, and not the whole breadth of the tooth ; so that in the enlarged figure of the jaw detached from its matrix, the incisors appear both narrower and further apart than they really are. The incisors in the Thylacinus are of a prismatic form; and the surface, corresponding to that which is exposed on the fossil, forms one of the angles, from which the tooth increases in breadth to its anterior part, which forms one of the three facets.
   Allowing for this circumstance, which must be borne in mind in an endeavour to arrive at the true affinities of the Phascolothere, the incisors in that fossil are evidently separated by wider intervals than in Thylacinus, Dasynrus or Didelphys; and the Phascolothere resembles, in this respect, as in the smaller proportions of its canine, the genus Myrmecobius.
   In the proportions of the grinders to each other, especially the small size of the hindmost molar, the Phascolothere resembles the Myrmecobius more than it does the Opossum, the Dasyure or the Thylacine; hut in the form of the crown it resembles the Thylacine more closely than any other genus of Marsupials. In the number of molar teeth the Phascolothere differs both from the Thylacothere and the Myrmecobius, and resembles the Opossum and Thylacine, having three false and four true molars, or seven grinders altogether, in each maxillary ramus. The distinction between.the false and true molars is however much less strongly marked, both in the Phascolothere and Thylacine, than in the Opossum. The difference between the false and true molars in the Opossum is chiefly indicated by the addition, in the true molars, of a pointed tubercle on the inner side of the middle large tubercle, and in the same transverse line with it; but in the Phascolothere, as in the Thylacine, there is no corresponding tubercle on the inner side of the large, middle, pointed cusp ; its place is occupied in the Phascolotherium by a ridge, which extends along the inner side of the base of the crown of the true molars, and projecting a little beyond both the anterior and posterior smaller cusps, gives the quinquecuspid appearance to the crown of the tooth, as represented by Dr. Buckland in his magnified view of the antepenultimate grinder of the Phascolotherium, given in the 2nd Plate of the illustrations of the Bridgewater Treatise. In the Thylacine the internal ridge is not continued across the base of the large middle cusp, but it extends along and beyond each of the lateral cusps, so as to give the tooth a similar quinquecuspid form to that which characterizes the true molars of the Phascolothere. Connecting the close resemblance which the molar teeth of the Phascolothere bear to those of the Thylacine with the similarities which have been already shown to exist in the several characteristic features of the ascending ramus of the jaw, I am of opinion that the marsupial extinct genus, indicated by the Stonesfield fossil here described, was nearly allied to Thylacinus, and that its position in the marsupial series is between Thylacinus and Didelphys:
   There are two linear impressions on the inner side of the horizontal ramus of the jaw of the Phascolothere which have been mistaken for indications of harmonia, or toothless sutures, analogous to those which join together the component pieces of the compound jaws of reptiles and fishes. One of these is a faint, shallow, linear impression, continued from between the antepenultimate and penultimate molars, obliquely downwards and backwards, to the foramen for the dental artery. I conceive it to be due to an accidental crack ; and if the portions of the bone which it separates were to be compared to the contiguous margins of the opercular and dentary pieces of a reptile’s jaw, it would be seen that the only suture, which in Reptiles is continued from any part of the level of the dental series between these pieces, passes in a totally different direction ; it is the suture which hounds the anterior part of the opercular piece, and which, in all reptiles, runs obliquely downwards and forwards, instead of downwards and backwards. The second impression (d. fig. 2. PI. VI.) in the jaw of the Phascolotherium is much more strongly marked than the preceding; it is a linear groove continued from the anterior extremity of the fractured base of the inflected angle obliquely downwards to the broken surface of the anterior part of the jaw. Whether this line be due to a vascular impression, or an accidental fracture, I do not offer an opinion ; but this may be confidently affirmed, that there is not any suture in the compound jaw of a reptile which occupies a corresponding situation. And lastly, with reference to the philosophy of pronouncing judgement on the saurian nature of the Stonesfield fossils from the appearances of sutures in the jaws themselves, I would offer one remark, the justness of which will be obvious alike to those who are and those who are not conversant with the details of Comparative Anatomy.
   The cumulative evidence of the true nature of the Stonesfield fossils, afforded by the shape of the condyle, coronoid process, angle of the jaw, different kinds of teeth, with the shape of their crowns, double fangs, and implantation in sockets, reposes on structures which cannot be due to accident, while those which favour the evidence of the compound structure of the jaw may arise from accidental circumstances.
   

