OF the extinct Reptilia hitherto discovered in different regions of the globe, the fossil skulls of some species have exhibited combinations of characters now peculiar to distinct orders of the class, or even to distinct classes of Vertebrate animals. The Ichthyosaurus, for example, shows the piscine proportions of the premaxillaries in the upper jaw : the Rynchosaurus shows the chelonian absence of teeth in both jaws : but the Dicynodon seems to have borrowed its peculiarities from a higher class, and to have engrafted some mammalian characteristics upon the upper jaw, whilst it combined a chelonian edentulous under jaw, and a crocodilian occiput, with a cranium essentially constructed after the lacertian type.
   These and most of the minor peculiarities of the cranial organization of the Dicynodont reptiles have been pointed out in my former account of some of the smaller species of the genus. There were, however, in Mr. Bain’s first collection some fragments indicative of a Dicynodon, with subcompressed tusks (D. Bainii), as large as a Walrus, but these were too scanty to deserve more than a reference to their indication of the size to which some species of that peculiar genus of reptile had attained during the mesozoic period in South Africa.
   In a subsequent transmission of fossils from the Graaf Reinet district and Kafraria by Mr. Bain, two almost entire skulls of a still larger species of Dicynodon with circular tusks were included. They have been ably relieved from their extremely hard matrix by Mr. Dew at the British Museum, and they exhibit, with the long descending upper canines of the genus, a proportion and shape of the temporal fossse more like those in the larger mammalian Carnivora, than in any known reptile, or than was indicated in any of the previously described smaller species of Dicynodon. Thus, of all the modifications of cranial structure which the fossil remains of extinct reptiles have offered to the contemplation of the naturalist, none have exhibited combinations of characters more extraordinary and suggestive than those presented by the old extinct Bidental Lizards of South Africa.
   In the species about to be described, which I propose to call Dicynodon tigriceps or the Tiger-headed Dicynodon, the general resemblance of the great mammalian Carnivora in the features which most impress the destructive physiognomy upon the skull is sufficiently striking.
   The chief difference, irrespective of size, which tho Dicynodon tigriceps presents, as compared with the Dicynodon lacerticeps, is the great expanse of the temporal fossse, and the great extent of osseous surface for the origins of the temporal muscles, which must have much exceeded the relative size of those muscles in any known existing reptile, and have equalled those of the tiger, lion, and other carnivorous mammals with large canine teeth.
   Like the smaller species of Dicynodon, the D. tigriceps resembled the Iguana, Varani, and many other existing Lizards, in having but one zygomatic arch, the superadded one, formed by the extension of the postfrontal to the mastoid in the Rynchocephalus, and in the Crocodiles, not being developed. The normal zygoma formed by the malar and squamosal, and by the junction of the latter with the mastoid and tympanic, presents in the D. tigriceps, however, a form and expanse quite unique in the class of Reptiles.
   The malar portion quits the lower and hinder angle of the orbit and, as it extends, changes its vertical for an horizontal plane, being, as it were, twisted upon itself so as to turn the upper border outwards: it then coalesces with the squamosal, and the arch is continued backwards, as a broad horizontally disposed plate of bone, slightly convex upwards, to the upper end of the tympanic, and the mastoid.
   The mastoid is continued from the back part of the zygoma, bending at almost a right angle as it ascends and passes forwards before contracting to join the extremity of the forked parietal. Below the mastoid the outer part of the occipital plate adds to the bony wall of the temporal fossa, and forms a broad, slightly convex prominence at the back part of that fossa. The inner side of the fossa, which forms a very small portion of the whole, encroaches upon the side of the body of the parietal, and is bounded above by a curved ridge of bone; the interspace of these parietal ridges is two inches at its narrowest part, which is just behind the median prominence supporting the foramen parietale. The temporal fossa communicates freely with the orbit.
   The breadth of the skull across the broadest part of the zygomata is 18 inches, the length of the skull not exceeding 20 inches ; for the extent of the upper jaw in advance of the nostrils may be pretty accurately estimated by the curvature of the portion which is preserved. The extreme breadth of the occipital surface is 13 inches ; the height of the same surface from the end of the basi-occipital processes is 8 inches.
   The occipital condyle, which was broken away in the previously described specimens, is entire in one of the large skulls, and in a fragment of another now under description: it is single, convex, subpedunculate, projecting freely from the foramen magnum with a broad reniform contour, being slightly excavated above: it seems to be formed wholly by the basioccipital, and appears small in proportion to the entire skull, the attachment of which to the trunk must have been powerfully secured by the mass of muscles inserted into the spacious and well-ossified occipital region. The transverse diameter of the condyle is 1 inch 10 lines, its vertical diameter 1 inch 4 lines : on each side of the upper part of its base is the foramen condyloideum : the foramen magnum is a vertical ellipse, 1 inch 8 lines in its long diameter, and 10 lines across.
   The basioccipital sends downwards a pair of hypapophyses, which slightly diverge as they descend : they are subcylindrical, straight, truncated, 1 inch 9 lines in length, 1 inch in breadth, and deeply excavated externally, as in the Iguana and some other Lizards. From the outside of the base of this process the (par- ?) occipital extends outwards, downwards, and backwards, terminating in a low and large obtuse process, projecting backward, close to where this part of the occipital seems to unite with the tympanic.
   The ex- and super-occipitals form a large triangular expanse of bone, vertical in position, but undulated and concave laterally above the foramen magnum, where it inclines a little forwards as it ascends: this expanse is overarched by the parietomastoid ridges on each side, where the surface is slightly convex at its upper half, concave below.
   The major part of this peculiarly expanded occipital bony surface is formed of a comparatively thin subvertical plate of bone, formed by the branch of the parietal, the mastoid, and contiguous parts of the occipital: which plate afforded attachment at its posterior surface for the nuchal muscles, at its anterior one for the temporal muscles.
   The cranium proper has the usual reptilian contracted calibre, and it seems the more contracted in the present great Dicynodon by comparison with the extent of the occiput and the still wider expanse and span of the zygomatic arches on each side. The upper surface of the cranium is almost flat; it is horizontal, and is beijt forwards at nearly a right angle with the occipital surface. It is bounded on each side by the temporal ridges, which turn the convexity of their curve towards each other: there is an eminence perforated by the foramen parietale in the midspace; the surface is narrowest behind this foramen, where it is slightly concave and measures but 2 inches 3 lines across: in front of the foramen the cranial roof gradually expands with a flatter surface to the post-frontals.
   On each side of the parietal part of the skull the temporal ridges bound a smooth elongated longitudinal concavity for the upper origin of the temporal muscles.
   The frontal region continues increasing in breadth as it advances, and sends outwards an angular, rather rough, obtuse, antorbital process p*), probably formed by the prefrontal. Anterior to this the broad flat platform of bone begins gradually to bend downwards between the nostrils, but still expands and overarches those cavities by a strong tuberosity. Here the breadth of the facial part of the skull is at least 8 inches.
   Judging by the curvature of the upper jaw anterior to the nostrils, and by the portion of the trenchant alveolar border which remains in front of the alveolus of the tusk, the anterior contour of the skull must have been such as is indicated by the dotted line at XX. In this side-view the total length of the skull from the back part of the mastoid root of the zygoma (s) to the end of the jaw so indicated gives 20 inches: the posterior border of the orbit divides this extent into two equal parts, the orbit being in the anterior half, and the posterior half being occupied chiefly by the temporal fossse.
   The posterior boundary of the orbit arches, from above, outwards, downwards, and backwards, of nearly the same breadth, which is 1 inch 3 lines; it is composed of the post-frontal and malar bones; the former descending to the lower border of the orbit, and the latter ascending behind the postfrontal, and gradually terminating in a point about an inch and a half from the upper surface of the cranium : the two bones are thus joined together by a long oblique suture. The malar appears to be continued backwards about three inches, along the inner side of the zygomatic platform, which is formed chiefly by the squamosal. In a second specimen of the skull of the Dicynodon tigriceps the post-orbital boundary descends more vertically, and the orbit is smaller.
   In the more perfect example of the skull, the orbit on both sides presents a subelongate triangular contour, with the angles rounded off, and the long diameter horizontal: this diameter is 4 inches; the vertical diameter at the fore part of the orbit is two inches and a half, whence it contracts to the posterior angle. The lacrymal foramen is situated just within the verge of the cavity, at the anterior inferior angle : about an inch above it, projects the antorbital process, divided by a notch and fossa from the supernarial tuberosity. The malar forms the chief part of the lower border of the orbit: it seems to extend to the lacrymal bone, and it rests in that extent upon the maxillary, which is continued backwards almost to the squamosal. The lower boundary of the orbit, so formed, increases in breadth and thickness as it advances, and assumes a trihedral figure.
   The maxillary bends down from beneath the anterior half of the orbit, and swells out to form the tusk-socket, which is continued about an inch below the trenchant alveolar border. There is no extension of that border behind the tusk; that great descending tooth terminates the border of the mouth behind. The diameter of the tusk where it emerges from the socket is 13 lines: it is here broken off on both sides, in the specimen described ; its transverse section is circular, not subelliptical, as in D. Bainii.
   The nostrils are 3 inches apart at their anterior borders ; they are oval, with the long diameter parallel with that of the orbit; the upper contour is more straight through the overarching tuberosity, the lower border is more curved : there is a trace of a suture descending from the middle of this border which unites the maxillary and premaxillary.
   The premaxillary forms the anterior border, and where it descends, between the nostrils, its middle part is slightly raised. The fractured anterior end of the premaxillary shows the two parallel longitudinal ridges, or the fore part of the long palate.
   The contour of the base of the skull forms an almost equilateral triangle with the hinder angles truncate. The posterior or palatal nostril (pri) is in the middle of the triangle; it is a simple narrow elliptical aperture 3 inches 9 lines long, and 1 inch 9 lines broad. It is bounded behind by the protuberant basisphenoid, which forms the narrowest part of the proper ‘basis cranii.’ From this protuberance four bony columns diverge, like a St. Andrew’s cross; two are slender, subcompressed, and diverge backwards to abut against the lower end of the tympanic pedicle; two are thicker, but also subcompressed and rounded below ; they diverge forwards, to form the sides of the posterior nostril; these increase in thickness as they advance and unite with other bones,— the palatines,—which converge to bound the posterior nostril in front; a strong buttress of the maxillary diverges from the above united bones to strengthen the inner side of the tusk-socket. There seems to have been an oblong tuberosity at the middle of each lateral border of the posterior nostril; part at least of such a projection has there been broken off. The bony palate in advance of the posterior nostril is entire; it is concave, most so from side to side, but shows three thick, obtuse, longitudinal eminences ; one at its hinder half, in the middle line; the other two at the fore part on each side of the middle line : these latter divide the fore part of the palate into three longitudinal chambers. The length of the bony palate is 7 inches, its breadth inches.

   The trenchant edentulous border rises as it advances from the tusk-socket, and then slightly descends to the fore part of the beak-like termination of the upper jaw.
  Lower jaw.—Of this there is the anterior portion, including the symphysis, where the rami are extensively confluent; such portion being conformable in size with the above-described cranium of the Dicynodon tigriceps. The symphysis is deep, curved lengthwise, with the convexity forwards, and more convex transversely; it appears to have been traversed by a median low obtuse ridge externally, corresponding to the median ridge of the premaxillary : its extent following the curve is not less than seven inches ; its breadth, following the curve, three and a half inches. An extent of seven inches of the alveolar border of the left ramus is preserved ; this border shows a slightly convex, prominent, vertical, longitudinal ridge on its inner side, a straight and lower ridge on its outer side, and an intervening groove, which, beginning five inches from the fore part of the jaw, gradually acquires a depth of six lines at the fractured end of the ramus. Not the slightest trace of teeth is visible. A strong longitudinal obtuse angular bar of bone begins to project from the outside of the ramus, four inches from the anterior end of the jaw, and one inch below the alveolar border. The dentary element shows a notch below the back part of the bar indicative of a small vacuity in this part of the jaw. The fractured surfaces of the rami expose the vertical fissure or division of the dentary element for junction with the hinder elements of the compound bone.
   In the shape and extent of the symphysis, and in the exterior bar or ridge, the lower jaw of the present large species repeats the generic modifications, previously described, of that of the smaller species of Dicynodon.
Comparison of the Dicynodon tigriceps with the D. lacerticeps.
   The most complete of the smaller skulls described in the first part of this Report had been mutilated to the same extent by the breaking off of the upper jaw anterior to the nostrils, as is the best preserved of the larger skulls here described; but being similarly perfect in other respects, it affords the subject of an instructive comparison.
   On a side view, the Dicynodon tigriceps differs from the D. lacerticeps in the relatively larger size of the temporal fossa and in the smaller size of the orbit: the great expanse of the temporal fossa involves also a different relative position of the orbit, which in D. lacerticeps occupies the middle third of the skull; whilst in D. tigriceps it is in the anterior half: the orbit is also of a different form, being almost circular in D. lacerticeps, and equalling the temporal fossa in size. The nostrils also appear to be relatively larger in D. lacerticeps, but this difference may be exaggerated by the less entire state of their bony circumference in the specimen of the first-described and smaller reptile.
   In a comparison of the occipital region, the mastoideo-parietal ridges appear in D. tigriceps to subside sooner as they ascend, converging to the top of that region ; and, though these ridges are less entire in the larger than in the smaller skull compared, the difference does not seem to be wholly due to accidental mutilation : the part above the foramen magnum seems to be naturally more concave from side to side than it is in D. tigriceps, in which the above ridges meet at top and there overhang the superoccipital region. In D. lacerticeps, the par- and ex-occipital plates abut against the mastoids and tympanies by three short thick truncate processes on each side : in D. tigriceps the union of the same parts seems to have been continuous and unbroken. The hypapophyses are relatively shorter and thicker in D. lacerticeps. The whole occipital region is broader in proportion to its height in D. tigriceps.
   In a comparison of the upper surface, the cranium proper is shorter in proportion to its breadth, and the foramen parietale is relatively nearer the back part in D. tigriceps; and the flat space between the temporal ridges is relatively much greater. In D. lacerticeps, these ridges nearly meet behind the foramen parietale. This is an important difference, as bearing on the question of the relation of the smaller to the larger skull, in regard to individual age. A young carnivorous animal differs from an old one of the same species in the smaller extent to which the origins of the temporal muscles ascend on the sides of the cranium; the interspace above, between those ridges, being broader as the animal is younger; whilst in the full-grown, especially the males, it becomes obliterated, and a further extent of origin is afforded to the biting muscles by the development of a median parietal crest.
   The extent of origin of the temporal muscles from the sides of the parietal bone, in D. lacerticeps, indicates the small skull, exhibiting that extent, to have been of a full-grown, if not old individual; the smaller relative extent of the same muscular attachments, and the wider flat interspace between those origins, in D. tigriceps, as shown in the two large equal-sized skulls, which seem to have come from adult individuals, plainly indicate, with the different form and proportions of the cranium, and the other differences above pointed out, a specific distinction from the D. lacerticeps.
   The profile of the skull in D. lacerticeps begins to slope or curve down from a line parallel with the back part of the orbits; but in the great D. tigriceps it does not begin to bend down until in advance of the orbits; and the preorbital part of the skull, with the interorbital space and the interspace of the nostrils, is relatively broader in D. tigriceps than in D. lacerticeps.

