THE first notice of the discovery of the osseous remains of the skeleton of a large edentate Mammal associated with fragments of a tesselated bony armour, similar to that of the Armadillo, appears in the note appended to the end of Cuvier’s chapter on the Megatherium, in the 4to edition of the Ossemens Fossiles, published in 1823.
   This notice occurs in an extract from a Letter addressed by D. Damasio Lar- ranaga, Cure of Monte Video, to M. Auguste St. Hilaire. The facts stated in this extract are the following:—A femur was discovered in the Rio del Sauce, branche du Saulis-Grande, which weighed seven pounds ; it wTas short, but might be from six to eight inches in width ; it resembled in every respect the femur of an Armadillo ; with it was found a portion of tesselated bony armour, of which the Cure promises to send one of the component pieces (une de ces ecailles) to M. Auguste Geoffroi. The tail was very short and very stout (tres-grosse) ; it had, in like manner, a bony armour (des ecussons), but this was not verticillate, or disposed in rings. These fossils are stated to have been met with near the surface of the earth, in alluvium, or strata of transport, indicative of a very recent epoch; similar fossils are said to occur in analogous strata near the lake Mirim, on the frontier of the Portuguese colonies.
   The notion that the fossils here mentioned belonged to the Megatherium rests solely on the circumstance of the worthy Cure having inserted the word Megatherium as the synonym of his gigantic Dasypus: “ Je ne vous ecris point sur mon Dasypus (Megatherium, Cuv.), parceque je me propose d’en faire l’objet d’un memoire,” &c. loc. cit. p. 191. The admeasurement which he fortunately gives of the femur proves that if that bone really belonged to the Megatherium it must have been part of a very young animal; for whereas the femur of the Megatherium is sixteen inches in width, that of the fossil in question has at the utmost only half that width. Without laying much stress on the accuracy of Don Larranaga’s comparison of his fossil femur with that of the existing Armadillos, I may observe that the femur of an Armadillo presents a striking character, in the third trochanter, likely to catch the eye of the most superficial observer ; and that if the fossil femur in question did actually present this character, it would be decisive against its identity with that of the Megatherium.
  Cuvier, however, makes no comment on these discrepancies, but merely observes that the Cure’s letter announces or indicates that the Megatherium had pushed its analogies with the Armadillos so far, as to be covered like them with a scaly cuirass.
  The next observations bearing upon the present question occur in Prof. Weiss’s Geological memoir on the Provinces of S. Pedro do Sul and the Banda Oriental, where certain fossils, collected by the Prussian traveller Sellow in the state of Monte Video, are described.
  One of these fossils is the fractured distal end of the femur of the Megatherium ; it had been discovered by the Indians, or at least made use of by them in cooking their food, in the neighbourhood of the Queguay, one of the tributaries of the Uruguay, and was found by Sellow near one of their deserted encampments : the fragment belongs to the right femur; the outer condyle is knocked off, and the bone is said to be blackened by fire. In short, it had been put to precisely the same use as that to which the vertebrae of Sir Woodbine Parish’s Megatherium were applied by the Peons who discovered that skeleton. No mention is made of any armour or portions of armour having been discovered associated with or near to this fragment; but in the ford of the Queguay a Spanish soldier found a fossil, which passed into the hands of the Surgeon major, Francisco Meves, and by him was given to Sellow. This fossil is figured in PI. IV. of Professor Weiss’s memoir ; he conjectures that it may have formed part of the tail-armour of the Megatherium, but allows that it is a fossil of very dubious character. It is unquestionably a portion of the dermal bony armour of some loricated animal.
  Sellow also collected, in the neighbourhood of the Queguay, portions of a fossil carapace, undoubtedly belonging to a large Tortoise, and to which the name of Testudo Sellowii is given by Weissf.
  The portions of tesselated bony armour, figured by Professor Weiss, and described at p. 277 of his Memoir, were obtained by Sellow on the Arapeychico, in the province of Monte Video ; but no bones, either of the Megatherium or any other animal, are mentioned as having been associated with them. This fossil armour precisely corresponds. with that discovered at the lake Las Averias, and brought over to England by Sir Woodbine Parish, and of which a portion is figured by Mr. Clift in his memoir on the Megatherium.
   A third series of fossils, in which fortunately some bones of the extremities were discovered associated with the tesselated bony case, was presented to Sellow by the President of the province of San Pedro, with the information that they had been originally discovered in the proximity of the Rio Janeiro. Now these important bones are not described by Professor Weiss ; but he states that they will form the subject of a subsequent memoir by Sellow himself. Prof. Weiss, however, gives the dimensions of the pieces of the armour, which, as the bones found therewith belonged chiefly to the left fore-leg, he conjectures to have belonged to the anterior and inferior part of the left side of the carapace. The chord of the longitudinal curve of the longest fragment measured twenty-three inches, and the depth from the middle of the chord to the under-surface of the concavity was two and a quarter inches. The chord of the transverse bow or curvature was ten inches, and the depth from the middle of the chord to the under surface of the armour four inches ; from which Sellow conjectured that the animal must have been ten feet, or fifteen palmas long, by seven palmas broad and four and a half palmas high.
   Thus the fossils from South America, noticed in the Berlin memoir, resolve themselves into three distinct groups, from three different localities ; first, a bone without armour ; secondly, armour without bones ; and thirdly, armour and bones mingled together in the same bed.
   Now the portions of tesselated armour from the two localities, viz. Arapey- chico and Rio Janeiro, are identical in structure. Professor Weiss’s opinion, that they belong to the Megatherium, rests solely on the observation made by Cuvier in reference to the note of the Spanish Cure, the bearing of which on the present question we have already examined; it is obvious, therefore, that the bones, found with the armour, can alone yield us the information we are in quest of, as to the nature of the huge animal so singularly protected. Fortunately for science, and for the determination more especially of the present interesting question, these bones have been excellently described and illustrated by Professor D’Altonf, to whom they were confided for that purpose after the decease of Sellow. They include the fractured extremity of the humerus, the entire radius and ulna, and a great proportion of the fore-foot, all belonging, as stated by Weiss, to the left side, and a less complete series of bones of the left hind-foot. Not any teeth, or portions of the skull accompanied them to Berlin, so that Professor D’Alton restricts his general conclusions respecting them to the facts that they are not remains of the Megatherium, but of a large edentate species more nearly allied to Dasypus.
   Professor D’Alton, at the conclusion of his memoir, alludes to the notice in the Proceedings of the Geological Society of London of the discovery of three skeletons of Megatherium in the province of Buenos Ayres, of which two were associated with the bony armour. This notice refers to the collection of fossils sent to this country by Sir Woodbine Parish ; I need scarcely observe, however, that of the three skeletons alluded to, only one is referrible to the Megatherium, and the parts of this skeleton which were brought to England have been described by Mr. Clift in the memoir already alluded to. No trace of an ossified dermal covering was found with or near this skeleton. Of the other two skeletons which were associated with the bony armour, portions of the armour alone, without bones, of the one, and a few bones without armour of the other, were brought to England;—the latter bones are described in the present paper.
   The skeleton to which they belonged was discovered at Villanueva, in the bed of a small rivulet, but the greater part of the bones crumbled to pieces on exposure to the air. The only portions which it was possible to preserve were the extremity of a jaw with three alveoli; part of the scapula, the distal end of the left humerus, the left radius, nearly entire ; two unguial phalanges of the fore-foot; the distal end of the left tibia and fibula, anchylosed together ; the left astragalus, calcaneum, naviculare, cuboides, and external cuneiform bones, including the three middle unguial phalanges of the hind-foot. The shell is described by Sir Woodbine Parish as having been situated about a foot below the principal mass of the bones, the concave side uppermost, and resembling the section of a large cask ; it would not, however, bear lifting out of its bed, but broke into small pieces, and crumbled into dust almost immediately.
   The small portion of the skeleton which was brought to England was presented by Sir Woodbine Parish to the College of Surgeons, together with the magnificent remains of the true Megatherium. Casts of the bones were made by order of the College, and presented, together with casts of the bones of the Megatherium, to different Museums, and amongst the rest to that in the Jardin du Roi at Paris. These casts attracted the attention of M. Laurillard, and Mr. Pentland, who was at that time at Paris. M. Laurillard has alluded to them in the following note appended to the chapter on the Megatherium in the lately published 8vo Edition (1836) of the Ossemens Fossiles. After giving the letter of the Cure Larranaga and Cuvier’s comment on it, Laurillard says, "Il serait fort possible que le Megatherium fut en effet recouvert de cuirasses ecailleuses; cependant il ne faudrait pas se hater de lui attribuer les grands fragmens qu’on a trouves, car les platres envoyes de Londres demontrent qu’un Tatou de taille gigantesque existe, avec le Megatherium, dans les plaines de Buenos Ayres. Ces morceaux caracteristiques consistent dans un calcaneum, un astragale et un scaphoid qui ne s’eloignent de ceux des Tatous vivans que par la grandeur et par des differences purement specifiques
   Mr. Pentland at the same time assured Sir Woodbine Parish, in a letter of the date of December 1835, that the bones which were found associated with the armour at Villanueva did not belong to the Megatherium, but to a gigantic. Armadillo ; this opinion he arrived at by comparing the tarsal bones above-mentioned with those of the Dasypus gigas.
   There is no question but that the correspondency, above indicated by MM. Laurillard and Pentland, in the structure of three of the most characteristic of the tarsal bones, sufficiently indicates the general affinity of the extinct animal possessing them to the Armadillo family ; but I shall hereafter show that the modifications of the other bones of the foot are such as to indicate something more than a specific distinction. Besides, it was evident both to Mr. Clift and myself, at the time when we first examined the fragment of the jaw' accompanying these bones, that the conformation of the alveoli in that fragment indicated a dentition differing more widely from that of the existing sub-genera of Armadillos than their respective dental characters differ from one another; we, therefore, hesitated in assigning these fossils to the genus Dasypus, hoping soon to obtain further information as to the dental character of the species to which they belonged.
   It was at this conjuncture, that Sir Woodbine Parish received the intelligence of the discovery of an entire skeleton, covered with its tesselated coat of mail, about five feet below the surface, in the bank of a rivulet near the Rio Matanza, about twenty miles south of the city of Buenos Ayres ; and with the account of this remarkable discovery there was, at the same time, transmitted a drawing or sketch of the whole animal, which has since been lithographed, and one of the teeth of the fossil itself (PI. X. fig. 1 and 2). This tooth Sir Woodbine Parish obligingly submitted to my examination : its general structure proved it to belong to an animal referrible to the Edentata of Cuvier; but its form was so peculiar, that I had no hesitation in pronouncing it to differ from that of any known edentate animal, recent or fossil, and, from its intimate texture, to be indicative of a new subgenus of the Armadillo family, for which I proposed the name of Glyptodon, in reference to the fluted or sculptured character of the tooth. A brief description of the tooth, with the account of the discoveries of the skeleton, were immediately printed, and have been published in Sir Woodbine Parish’s work on Buenos Ayresf. Subsequently, the recollection of the fragment of the jaw, with its peculiar alveoli, occurred to me; and on comparing the tooth of the Glyptodon with that fragment, I have found that the largest socket in it agrees in size and form with the tooth, and that the longitudinal ridges, which characterize the socket and distinguish it from those of the existing Armadillos, precisely correspond with the peculiar flutings in the tooth itself.
   Thus, then, the suspicion that the bones, discovered with the tesselated osseous coat of mail at Villanueva, might appertain to the same species as the more perfect skeleton and cuirass found near Rio Matanza, is converted into a certainty; and we may entertain hopes, that the materials will shortly arrive from which we may obtain as complete a knowledge of the osteology of the Glyptodon,—the true possessor of the hitherto-described tesselated armour,—as exists of the Megatherium itself.
   The Glyptodon differs from the Megatherium not only in the form and structure, but in the number of its teeth, which appear, from the figure and account transmitted to Sir Woodbine Parish, to be eight on each side of each jaw, as in the section of Armadillos called Cabassous by Cuvier. Judging from the same sketch, the Glyptodon differs from all known Armadillos in the form of the lower jaw, and in the presence of a long process descending from the zygoma, in both which respects it resembles, and evidently indicates a transition to, the Megatherium. The same figure shows the tail to be more remarkable for its thickness than its length, and to be protected by armour covering only the upper surface like a roof, and not encompassing it like the verticillate caudal armour of the Armadillos, in both which respects we cannot fail to perceive a correspondence between the Glyptodon and the great Dasypus with armour, described as a Megatherium by the Cure Larranaga.
   I shall refrain, however, from any further remarks or speculations which might be suggested by the figure and notice of the entire Glyptodon, published by Sir Woodbine Parish, and proceed to describe the portions of that animal which have actually reached this country.
   The molar tooth from the Rio Matanza is fractured, but the grinding surface, and upwards of an inch of the crown, are quite perfect. The whole length of this fragment is two inches and three lines, and there is no indication of a diminution in any of its diameters, from the grinding surface to the opposite fractured end : in this respect it agrees with the form of the sockets in the fragment of the jawr of the individual previously discovered, as these sockets terminate abruptly without any contraction: from their depth we may conclude that the length of the entire tooth was about four inches; the antero-posterior diameter of the tooth is one inch; the transverse diameter varies from six to seven lines. The three sockets in the fragment of the jaw give the same general proportions, though they vary a little as to size, whence it is shown that the teeth of the Glyptodon are much more compressed than those of the Megatherium; they differ still more materially in their intimate structure, which corresponds with that of the Armadillos: the main body of the tooth, or the dentine, consists of fine calcigerous tubuli, radiating with a pretty straight course from the medullary cavity; the dentine is surrounded by a very thin layer of csementum, and the pulp-cavity, at the upper part of the tooth, is consolidated by the ossified remains of the pulp, which is harder than the surrounding dentine. The teeth of the Glyptodon, however, differ in a marked degree from those of all the known species of Armadillo, in being traversed, through the whole length of both their outer and inner sides, by two broad and deep angular grooves, each extending from the opposite sides about one-third of the transverse diameter of the tooth, so as to divide the grinding surface into three portions, joined together by the contracted isthmus interposed between the opposite grooves. Of these portions the posterior one is broader than the other two. The sockets present longitudinal angular ridges, corresponding to these channels or flutings, and prove that they were continued through the whole length of the tooth ; this is slightly curved, and the concavity is turned inwards in the teeth of the lower jaw, as in the Toxodon. I have elsewhere observed that the teeth of the Glyptodon exhibit a more complicated form than those of any recent or extinct edentate species hitherto discovered, and seem to indicate a transition from the Edentata to the pachydermatous Toxodon: it will be hereafter seen that the modifications of the locomotive extremities bespeak a similar tendency in the Glyptodon to the multungulate Pachyderms.
   The fragment of the jaw of the Glyptodon, discovered at Villanueva with the other bones now about to be described, consists of a portion broken off from near the extremity of the left ramus, and includes three alveoli, which slightly increase in size as they are placed farther back ; this circumstance, as well as the anterior position of the sockets, correspond with the sketch of the entire Glyptodon, already published by Sir W. Parish, and make us regard with more confidence the indications of an affinity to the Megatherium in the double flexure of the lower jaw, and the long descending process from the zygoma represented in that sketch. As the general correspondence of the conformation of the alveoli with the structure of the teeth has already been noticed, it is only necessary to subjoin their dimensions. The antero-posterior diameter of the first is ten lines ; the transverse diameter of its posterior division, which corresponds to the broadest part of the tooth, is five lines ; the antero-posterior diameter of the second socket twelve lines ; its transverse diameter six lines and a half; the antero-posterior diameter of the third socket thirteen lines ; its transverse diameter cannot be determined, the inner wall of the socket being broken away.
  Humerus.—The distal half of the left humerus exhibits a thick projection beyond the internal condyle, and a broad, thin, and well-produced supinator ridge above the external condyle, which, with the articular trochlea for the antibrachial bones, are closely conformable with the structure of the humerus in the Armadillos ; but the internal condyle is not perforated, and the depressions above the trochlea, both in front, and more especially that behind, are relatively deeper. The twist of the humerus is strongly marked; the base of the strong deltoid trochanter is discernible at the fractured extremity of the hone; but on the opposite side there is a rugged raised surface for a muscular insertion, of which I do not perceive the analogue in the Armadillos. The humerus of the Megatherium, notwithstanding it apparently offers the same exception among Edentata with that of the Glyptodon in the im- perforation of the internal condyle, differs widely from the present bone in the extraordinary expansion of its distal extremity, especially of the external condyle.
  Radius.—The radius of the Glyptodon, in its comparative shortness and general form, likewise corresponds very closely with that of the Armadillos ; it differs principally in being less compressed. The proximal, semioval, articular surface, which plays upon the anterior part of the trochlea of the humerus, is, in the transverse direction, convex on the inner and concave on the outer side ; the inner part of the proximal end is much produced: the posterior surface of the bone is traversed longitudinally by a deep and wide rugged groove ; the bone assumes somewhat of a trihedral figure towards its distal end; the anterior ridge is produced below the distal articulation in the form of an obtuse, sub-compressed process ; the posterior ridge terminates in a broad rugged process; the radial, which in the prone position of the bone becomes the inner side of the distal extremity, is much produced ; the distal articular concavity is formed by an oblique excavation leading downwards from the posterior towards the anterior margin of the distal end; the articular surface is divided by an oblique groove into two parts, and in some species of Armadillo this groove is represented by an entering notch.
   The description and figure which Professor D’Alton has given of the radius, which forms one of the series of bones associated with the bony armour described by Professor Weiss, proves them to belong to a species of Glyptodon identical with the present: the characteristic process from the fore-part of the distal end of the radius appears, however, to be broken off in Sellow’s specimen; and the bone is about one-fourth smaller, belonging, as the separate epiphyses demonstrate, to an immature individual. The radius here described measures seven inches and a half in length, and three inches across its distal end.
   The perfect radius of the Megatherium, forming part of the skeleton brought to this country by Sir Woodbine Parish, fortunately affords the means of a close comparison between it and the corresponding bone of the Glyptodon. It measures twenty-eight inches in length, and six inches and a half across its distal end.
   Besides the disparity of size, which is most striking—the radius of the larger Edental being more than three times greater in every dimension,—we find well- marked differences in all the details of its conformation : its proximal articular surface is subcircular and uniformly concave; the margins of this concavity are not extended in any direction, so as to overhang any part of the shaft of the bone ; this shaft is compressed, and the radial edge produced; the concave distal articular surface is nearly at right angles with the axis of the bone, and there is no process developed from its anterior part. The Megatherium, in deviating from the Glyptodon in all these points, deviates of course in the same degree from the Armadillo-tribe.
   To judge from the figure which Professor D’Alton has given of the ulna of Sellow’s Glyptodon, this bone equally illustrates the affinity of the latter animal to the Dasypodoid, and its deviation from the Megatherioid families of Edentata.
   Two unguial phalanges, which, from their obliquity, had been referred by Mr. Clift to the fore-foot, are proved to be correctly so referred by the memoir of Professor D’Alton, in which the bones of nearly the entire fore-foot are excellently described and figured. The difference in size between the bones so figured and the present phalanges corresponds exactly with that which has been noticed in the radius of the two specimens ; the smaller phalanx in the present collection belongs to the third, the larger to the fourth toe, of the left fore-foot. In both, the proximal extremity offers a double shallow articular pulley ; it is placed obliquely, so that the end of the bone must have been inclined somewhat downwards. The upper and outer margin is produced; the hone is thicker on the inner than the outer side, towards which it slightly bends ; the upper surface is evenly convex, but pitted with numerous vascular impressions, which are strongest at the margin ; the under surface of the phalanx presents a rough, convex protuberance, occupying the posterior half of the under surface.
   Of all Edentata, existing or extinct, the species of the genus Dasypus are those to which the Glyptodon makes the nearest approach in the structure of the unguial phalanges ; but in their shortness, as compared with their breadth and depth, these bones of the Glyptodon resemble still more the unguial phalanges of the Pachyderms : the middle and proximal phalanges of the fore-foot of the Glyptodon, which are described and figured in the memoir of Prof. D’Alton, differ from those of both the Armadillos and the Pachyderms in their very remarkable shortness, and in the flatness of their articular surfaces. The short, broad, depressed terminal phalanges of the Glyptodon must have been encased in correspondingly short and strong hoof-like claws, and have presented a striking contrast with the foot of the Megatherium. The long and compressed claw-bone of this gigantic Edental, with its basis encompassed by a bony unguial sheath, bespeaks the fore-foot to have been an instrument, the use of which, in scratching and digging, and perhaps occasionally defending its possessor, were of more consequence in the living economy of the individual, than mere subserviency to support and progression. The peculiarly compact and robust structure of the foot of the Glypiodon, on the other hand, is eminently suggestive of such a subserviency, and more especially as the base of a column of support ; but as this fore-foot was associated with a rotatory condition of the radius, it is probable that the Glypiodon had the power of applying its anterior extremities to all the purposes to which the Armadillos, its nearest congeners, apply theirs.
   Of the posterior extremities, Sir Woodbine Parish’s collection of the bones of the Glyptodon include the anchylosed distal extremities of the tibia and fibula; an astragalus, calcaneum, scaphoides, cuboides, external cuneiform bone, the three phalanges of the second toe and the middle and distal phalanges of the third and fourth toes, with a few sesamoid bones; all belonging to the left side.
   Sellow’s collection also included most of these bones, but in a less perfect condition than the present. Both collections, while they establish the identity of the species possessing the ponderous bony covering, at the same time prove the close correspondence which subsists between the fore- and hind-feet of the Glyptodon in general form and structure.
  Tibia.—Sufficient of the tibia remains to show that it had the compressed form and excavated inner surface characteristic of that of the Armadillos ; that a similar wide space separated it from the fibula, with which it is also anchylosed; and that the anterior margin of the bone was continued obliquely as a strong ridge to the inner angle of the distal surface. The distal articular surface presents two concavities separated by a convexity, the outer hollow being the largest and deepest; the external malleolus forms a well-marked process, as in the Armadillos ; at the back part of the tibia we find also two well-marked tendinous grooves separated by a projecting ridge. The corresponding part of the skeleton of the Megatherium deviates widely in the proportions of the tibia and fibula, and in the conformation of the distal articular surface from that of the Glyptodon.
  Astragalus.—The upper surface of this bone (PI. XI. fig. 3) describes a regular convex curve in the antero-posterior direction; transversely it forms, as in the Armadillo, two marginal convex trochlem, separated by an intermediate wide concavity : the internal or tibial trochlea is somewhat lower and broader than in Dasypus, in which respects Glyptodon manifests an approximation to Scelidotherium, which, in the structure of its astragalus, presents an intermediate step in the gradation from the Armadillo to the Sloth. In the astragalus of the Glyptodon a rough surface encroaches in the form of a concave notch upon the anterior- margin of the tibial articular surface, as in the Dasypus gigas: the astragalus, anterior to this part, is extended forwards in the form of a rough convex protuberance, which overhangs the scaphoid articular surface; the aspect of this articular surface is obliquely downwards and forwards, so that the whole of it is visible when we look upon the inferior surface of the astragalus : in the anteroposterior direction the scaphoid articular surface is nearly flat, very slightly concave anteriorly, and as slightly convex posteriorly; in the transverse direction it is regularly convex. Such a structure and disposition of the scaphoid articulation does not exist in any Armadillo ; and the deviation on the part of Glyptodon from Dasypus in this respect is greater than any of the specific differences observable in the several Dasypi. The peculiar transverse extension of the articular surface for the scaphoid is well shown when the astragalus of the Glyptodon is viewed from the inner or tibial side, as in fig. 5, where this surface, surmounted by the tuberosity above described, is directed towards the right hand. The tibial articular surface encroaches only a slight way upon this side of the astragalus. The outer or fibular surface of the astragalus presents, in Glyptodon, a remarkably regular triangular figure, of which the upper and longest side is slightly convex, while the two lower sides are straight and equal; the fibular articular surface encroaches about half-way down this surface, but further posteriorly than anteriorly: the reverse of this is seen in the Armadillos, the astragalus of which also never presents this triangular form. The astragalus, indeed, of the Scelidothere, which in other respects more nearly resembles that of the Megathere, resembles that of the Armadillos in the form and condition of its outer facet more than does the astragalus of the Glyptodon. On the inferior surface of the astragalus of Glyptodon we perceive that the internal facet for the articulation with the calcaneum (PI. XI. fig. 4, h) is separated by a rough groove, as in the Armadillos, from the scaphoid articular surface (a). In the Armadillos, however, the inner calcaneal surface is flat, or slightly convex ; in the Glyptodon it is remarkably concave in the antero-posterior direction. The outer calcaneal facet is almost perfectly flat in Glyptodon ; it is concave in all the Armadillos : both these differences may be regarded as something more than merely specific.
   Os calcis.—In the calcaneum we of course perceive a corresponding difference between Glyptodon and Dasypus; the inner articular surface being flat in the former and convex in the latter, while the outer articular surface presents the reverse conditions. The inner surface of the posterior projecting part of the calcaneum is more concave in Glyptodon than in Dasypus ; the under surface is broader and flatter, and the posterior surface is produced in the form of a strong ridge below its level. The anterior articular surface for the os cuboides is relatively smaller than in the Armadillos ; it is flat instead of concave, with the lower part bent forwards at an open angle with the vertical part of the surface : there is a much greater extent of rough surface on the anterior part of the calcaneum, below the cuboidal facet, than exists in the Armadillos; with these differences, however, the os calcis of the Glyptodon presents a much closer correspondence to that of the Armadillos than to that of the Megatherium.
   Scaphoides.—I have already spoken of the peculiar aspect of the scaphoidal articular surface in the astragalus of the Glyptodon : the verticality of the articular surfaces upon the scaphoid bone for the cuneiform bones is produced by the great thickening of the lower part of the scaphoid as compared with the upper, which thus compensates for the obliquity of the articular surface on the astragalus. The scaphoid bone of the Glyptodon presents a remarkably compressed form ; the posterior articular surface (PI. XI. fig. 1, a) is concave, chiefly in the transverse direction, and corresponds in size and form with the opposed surface on the astragalus ; a rough flattened margin, of about half an inch in breadth, intervenes between the posterior and anterior vertical articular surfaces, at their upper and outer parts. The tibial side of the scaphoid is produced and thickened, and is irregularly rounded ; a very peculiar elongated conical and slightly twisted process (ib. h) is continued from the middle of the inferior thickened margin; the base of this process is separated by a smooth notch from the internal protuberance. The articular surface for the external cuneiform bone (ib. fig. 2, c) is the largest of the three and of a semilunar figure ; the middle articular surface (ib. d) is in the form of a narrow vertical ellipse; the internal surface (ib. e) looks inwards and forwards, as in the Armadillos : external to the cuneiform articular surfaces there is a small narrow vertical facet for a part of the os cuboides.
   Notwithstanding the peculiarities which have been pointed out, the scaphoides of the Glyptodon resembles that of the Armadillos much more than it does that of the Megathere, from which it differs more especially in the uniform concavity of the posterior articular surface.
   The external cuneiform bone of the Glyptodonf differs from that of the different species of Dasypus in its remarkably compressed form ; it is, in fact, a simple triangular plate of bone, with the posterior surface smooth and very slightly concave for the articulation with the scaphoid; the anterior surface very slightly convex for the articulation with the metatarsal of the third toe: the outer contour of the bone is convex, the inner one concave ; the anterior articular surface encroaches a little on this side to join a portion of the metatarsal of the second toe: on the under and outer side of the bone there is a very small facet, which touches the cuboides. The external cuneiform bone of the Megathere differs from that of the Glyptodon in being thicker as wrell as broader at its upper part; but, upon the whole, the external cuneiform bone of the Glyptodon resembles that of the Megathere more than it does that of the Armadillos.
   The os cuboides of the Glyptodon deviates still more than the scaphoid bone from its analogue in the Armadillos in its remarkable antero-posterior compression: it presents an irregular oblong figure, thicker at its inner than its outer margin ; the posterior surface presents a small convex articular surface for that of the os calcis, like which, the curve of the lower part is slightly angular ; this surface is near the upper and outer margin of the bone ; on the inner margin there is a long, narrow, sub-elliptic facet for the scaphoid. The inferior surface of the cuboid (PI. XI. fig. 6) is divided by a deep and wide groove for the tendon of the peroneus muscle; above which is the triangular surface for the metatarsals of the two outer toes, which is bounded above by a rather sharp edge. The posterior part of the lower surface of the cuboid, like the adjoining part of the calcaneum, is smoothed down by the playing of the strong flexor tendons of the toes.
   The middle and inner cuneiform bones are wanting ; but it is evident from the space intervening between the second metatarsal bone and scaphoid, that they must have resembled the external cuneiform in their antero-posterior compressed shape.
   The metatarsals of the three middle and largest toesf are fortunately preserved and entire ; and here we have the most striking deviation from the existing Armadillos, in the extreme shortness of these bones, in none of which does the longitudinal or antero-posterior diameter equal either the transverse or vertical diameters.
   The second metatarsal presents somewhat of a wedge-shape, broadest at its lower and inner sides, and narrowest at its upper and outer sides ; posteriorly it presents a flat surface for articulating with the middle cuneiform bone, which articulation is two inches in vertical extent and an inch and a quarter across the upper part, and proves the middle cuneiform bone to have been much smaller than the external one above-described ; this articular surface of the second metatarsal is continuous at its upper and outer angle with a small triangular facet, which articulates with the external cuneiform bone ; a third oblong articular surface is continued from the preceding upon the greater part of a depression on the outer surface of the bone, and this articular surface is applied against a corresponding one on the upper and back part of the middle metatarsal. The articular surface on the anterior part of the bone for the first phalanx of the second toe is slightly convex, longer in the vertical than the transverse directions. At the under part of the bone are two trochlear surfaces for two sesamoid bones.

   The third or middle metatarsal bone is the largest of the three; it diminishes in breadth, but greatly increases in antero-posterior thickness from the upper to the lower surface : the posterior articular surface is very slightly concave, and is nearly exclusively applied to the external cuneiform bone above-described: a small portion is deflected forwards from its upper and inner side to be applied to the oblique facet in the depression on the outer side of the second metatarsal: there is a similar depression and articular facet on the upper and outer side of the present metatarsal, in which a corresponding process of the fourth metatarsal is wedged. By this structure the three principal metatarsals are interlocked together, and any force or concussion from the toes would thus be transferred not only directly backwards to the tarsal bones, but obliquely from one metatarsal to another, whereby peculiar strength and security is given to the bony compages of the foot. The anterior surface of the middle metatarsal is slightly convex, two inches long by one and three quarters wide, which gives an idea of the bulk of the first phalanx of the middle toe: the under part of the present metatarsal bone presents two broad concave grooves for large sesamoid bones.
   The fourth metatarsal is smaller than the second ; its outer rough surface is convex, its inner one nearly straight, but with a small concave facet bounded by a raised ridge, and adapted to the convex articular surface in the depression on the opposed surface of the third metatarsal: the oblong posterior articular surface adapted to the os cuboides is slightly concave, with the transverse diameter equal to half the vertical one: the anterior surface for the fourth toe is triangular and nearly flat; there are two sesamoid grooves on the under part of this metatarsal bone. There are no remains of the small external or fifth toe, but its existence is indicated by a very small flat articular facet on the outer side of the fourth metatarsal bone, and by the extent of surface on the cuboid which it leaves uncovered. There is no evidence of the relative size of the first or innermost toe.
   The three phalanges of the second, and the middle and distal phalanges of the third and fourth toes, are fortunately preserved. The proximal phalanx of the second toe* is a vertically oblong, compressed, plate of bone, thicker above than below in the antero-posterior direction; a protuberance rises from the middle and posterior part of the upper surface ; the lower margin presents a deep and narrow notch. The posterior surface is slightly concave, the anterior one flat, with a rough spot in the centre. The second phalanx of the same toef is still more compressed ; its greatest length or antero-posterior extent, which is at the upper part, measures only six lines, whilst its vertical diameter is twenty lines, and its transverse diameter seventeen lines ; its lower margin is notched like the preceding phalanx, and at the middle of the posterior articular surface there is a central depression: from the very slight extent of motion allowed by these flattened articulations of the toes, one cannot he surprised that the synovial bag should be in part obliterated, as these rough places in the centre of the articulating surfaces would seem to indicate. The form of the anterior articulating surface of the second phalanx is shown in PI. XII. fig. 3.
   The distal or unguial phalanx of the second toe# presents a very remarkable form; it is suddenly expanded, in breadth and depth, immediately beyond the articular facet for the preceding phalanx, and this facet appears thus to occupy only the middle of the posterior surface, and to be surrounded by a broad rough margin. This surface is not placed at right angles to the long axis of the phalanx, but slopes from above downwards and forwards at a very acute angle with the upper surface, so that the apex of the phalanx points almost directly downwards ; the inferior boundary of the posterior surface forms a rough ridge, separated by a smooth narrow concavity from the anterior border of the phalanx : the superior sloping surface is slightly convex, and deeply pitted and sculptured with vascular grooves and impressions.
   The unguial phalanx of the third toef is broader but shorter than the preceding, and is of a more symmetrical figure: the lower margin of its posterior surface forms a broader ridge, and the articular surface is a little more convex, but the resemblance is otherwise very close. The unguial phalanx of the fourth toe has the same general form as the preceding, but is smaller ; like the last phalanx of the second toe, it is unsymmetrical, but from a different modification: in the second toe the inner margin is rounded off towards the outer ; in the fourth toe the outer margin is rounded off towards the inner. The middle phalanx of the third | and fourth toes is more square-shaped and broader than that of the second; it has the same general compressed form, with nearly flat articular surfaces, but, being narrower above, it resembles an inverted wedge ; it is also notched, but less deeply, below, and has an articular facet for a sesamoid bone on each side of the notch.
   When the bones of the hinder extremity above-described are arranged in their natural relative positions, they present to our observation the framework of a foot of such a construction and form as I may venture to say is without a parallel in the animal kingdom : the nearest approach to its broad, thick, short, and massive proportions is made by the skeleton of the fossorial extremity of the Mole; but it is the fore-foot only of this animal that can be compared, in the compressed bulky figure of the metacarpals and proximal and middle phalanges, with the singular hinder extremity of the Glyptodon above-described. The hind-foot of the Mole resembles, in the lengthened metatarsal and phalangeal bones, that of the existing Armadillos, and the generality of quadrupeds. It might be conjectured, that the Megatherium, since its hind-foot is well known to he very apocryphally restored in the Madrid skeleton, may approximate in some degree in this part of its skeleton to the Glyptodon, especially if the hypothesis be admitted that the Megathere was in like manner laden with a ponderous coat of armour. But the structure of the terminal phalanges of the Megathere at all events differs most widely from that which we have just described in the Glyptodon : the compressed lengthened shape is as extreme in the claw-bones of the one, as the depressed shortened figure is in those of the other extinct quadruped. In the Glyptodon the foot appears to be expressly modified to form the base of a column destined to support an enormous superincumbent weight: in the Megatherium, one would infer that the bulky body had not been clad in an expanded bony coat of mail, from the very circumstance that the toes were developed to sustain and wield long and compressed claws, such as form the compensating weapons of defence of the hair-clad Sloths and Anteaters. The unguial phalanges of the mailed Armadillos, in their shorter, broader, and flatter form, make a much nearer approach to those of the Glyptodon. We may readily admit, indeed, that the hind- foot of the Glyptodon is an extreme modification of the same general plan of structure as that on which the foot of the Armadillo is constructed ; but if we were led to conclude that the differences in the tarsal bones exceeded those which were traceable in the same bones between one species of Armadillo and another, a for tiori we must admit that the antero-posterior compression of the metatarsals and phalanges, and the total suppression in these of the ginglymoid trochlear articulations in the Glyptodon, are indicative of a difference of general habits much greater than is usually observed in species of the same genus.
   The dental modifications already described are conformable with, and in fact lead irresistibly to, the same opinion respecting the nature and affinities of the Glyptodon, as that to which we have been conducted by an examination and comparison of the locomotive organs : and it may be concluded, therefore, that the extinct edentate animal, to which belongs the fossil tesselated osseous armour described by Weiss, Buckland and Clift, cannot be called an Armadillo, without making use of an exaggerated expression, and still less a species of Megatherium-, but that it offers the type of a distinct genus, which was much more nearly allied to the Dasypodoid than to the Megatherioid families of Edentata, and, most probably, connected that order of quadrupeds with the heavy-coated Rhinoceroses of the Pachydermatous group.
   The question which may next arise, is, whether the tesselated armour described and figured by Prof. Weiss be specifically identical with that brought over by Sir Woodbine Parish, and described by Dr. Buckland and Mr. Clift. Their extremely close resemblance in point of structure will be manifest to whoever compares Plates I. and II. of Prof. Weiss’s Memoir with PI. XLVI. of Mr. Clift’s paper: the polygonal pieces in the former are, however, generally a little smaller than those figured by Mr. Clift; yet some portions in Prof. Weiss’s figures, as PI. I. fig. 3, t. 1, fully equal in size the largest polygons in the English specimens, and the whole of his elaborate description tends to prove that the portions of armour discovered by Sellow and Sir Woodbine Parish belong to the same species of extinct animal. If, however, there were no other grounds for this opinion than the comparison of the coat of mail, we could not arrive at a perfectly satisfactory conclusion in consequence of the near resemblance which some species of Armadillo present in the structure of their tesselated armour; fortunately, however, the parts of the skeleton transmitted along with the armour by both Sellow and Sir Woodbine Parish, afford the means of arriving at positive certainty on this point. The radius and a few bones of the hind-foot of Sellow’s specimen are sufficiently perfect, and their delineations by the highly-esteemed pencil of Prof. D’Alton are sufficiently characteristic and exact, to show them to he identical in form and structure with the corresponding hones of the Glyptodon, here described. Sellow’s specimen was, however, as we have seen, a younger individual than Sir Woodbine Parish’s, the epiphyses of the radius not being united, and the bone about one-fifth smaller. All the other bones of Sellow’s specimen, which are sufficiently perfect to be compared with Sir Woodbine Parish’s, show a corresponding inferiority of size, together with the other indications that the animal had perished ere it had attained its full growth.
   Thus, then, we obtain proof that the only portions of tesselated armour transmitted to Europe, with the conditions requisite for determining the species to which they belonged, testify to their having formed part of the structure of an edentate animal, widely different from, and much smaller than, the Megatherium.
   Does it therefore necessarily follow, it may then be asked, that the Megatherium was not in like manner covered with a bony coat of armour ? Undoubtedly it does not. But the proof or the probability that it was so armed, must at present repose on arguments afforded either by modifications of the skeleton analogous to those which in the Armadillos have relation to their osseous coat of mail, or by other peculiarities indicative of a similar relation.
   Our distinguished President, Dr. Buckland, has called attention to the broad and rough flattened surface of a part of the crest of the widely-expanded ilium, to the breadth of the summit of the spines of many of the vertebrae, and also of the superior convex bend or angle of certain ribs, as affording “ evidence of pressure similar to that we find on the analogous parts of the skeleton of the Armadillo: ” he has likewise adduced the massive proportions of the hind-legs and tail, as conditions consistent with the necessity for carrying so ponderous a cuirass as that which he supposes to have covered the body of the Megatherium.
   But the above-cited modifications of the vertebne, pelvis and ribs are more strongly marked in the skeleton of the Anteater and Sloth than in that of the Armadillo ; and if the skeleton of this mailed Edental be studied in reference to its subserviency to the support of the dermal armour, the modifications for this end will be found to be widely different from, and more striking than, any which have been pointed out in the remains of the Megatherium.
   The modifications of this nature which we observe in the pelvis of the Armadillo, are the following :—
   1st. The anchylosis of a great number of vertebrae, so as to form a very long sacrum, which, in the Dasypus tricinctus, for example, includes twelve vertebrae*. 2ndly. The great antero-posterior development of the spines of these vertebrae, which thus form a continuous vertical ridge of bone, bearing immediately the superincumbent weight, and, in some species, as in the Dasypus tricinctus, by the corresponding development of a ridge from the median line of the under surface of the armour. 3rdly. This weight is transmitted from the sacrum to the thigh-bones by two converging bony columns on each side : one of these is formed by the ischium, which is anchylosed to the posterior part of the sacrum ; the second and more characteristic mode of transferring the weight of the armour from the sacrum to the femur, is by the conversion of the iliac bone into a stout three-sided beam, passing straight from the thigh-joint to abut against the anterior part of the sacrum, where the weight of the shell is greatest. In no species of Armadillo is the ilium expanded ; in some species a small angular process projects outwards from the sacral, or upper extremity of that columnar bone ; in others, as the D. tricinctus, there is not even this feeble representative of the expanded ilia of the Megatherium. The Megatherium, in fact, resembles the Elephant in the size, form and position of its iliac bones, as well as in their expanded and flattened labrum, more nearly than it does any other existing quadruped. The Edentata which make the nearest approach to this characteristic structure of the Megathere are the Sloths, and next to them the great hairy Anteater (Myrmecophaga jubata). To argue that the broad and flattened ilia of the Megatherium are conditions of those bones by which they are adapted to sustain a heavy coat of bony armour, seems to imply that a continuous transverse wall would be a better support to a solid and unyielding roof than the judicious disposition of a less amount of material in the form of beams. If a covering consist of flexible material, then the surface of support must be to a certain extent continuous or extended ; and it would seem that it is on this principle that the iliac bones of the Elephant are arched outwards so as to afford an extended surface of support to its yielding, though dense, integument: we may therefore presume that a like relation subsisted between the expanded ilia of the Megatherium and its integument. The compact covering of the Armadillo rests upon a more contracted basis ; and when we compare the mechanism of this support with the scaffolding of an inflexible roof, the same principle may be traced in both the natural and artificial architecture. It is by this chain of reasoning that I have been led to a conclusion, in respect of the relations of the iliac bones of the Megatherium to its integument, different from that which has been cited. But the part of the pelvic structure of the Megatherium, which, perhaps, tells the strongest against its possessing a ponderous coat of mail, is the paucity of the sacral vertebrse, conjoined with their structure. These, instead of being ten or twelve, do not exceed four in number, and they are further characterized by the comparatively small size of their spinous processes, which are not locked together as in the Armadillos, but are separated by intervals as in the Sloths.
   It will be remembered that the estimable and justly celebrated author, from whose reasonings on the osteological relations of the Megatherium I have thus far ventured to dissent, enunciates his conclusion with philosophic caution, and states it to be probable that the Megatherium possessed a bony coat of mail.
   But that which Cuvier and M. Laurillard have ventured to regard as only possible, and Dr. Buckland as probable, M. de Blainville has since announced to be a positive fact. He has communicated to the Academy of Sciences the statement that bones of the Megatherium have recently been discovered, accompanied with fragments of a carapace belonging indubitably to the same animal* ; and he adds, that the association of a bony armour with the internal skeleton of the Megatherium can be demonstrated as surely by a, priori reasoning as by the a posteriori fact.
   Some interesting and novel arguments, deduced from the osteological structure of the Megatherium, might have been expected from so accomplished a Comparative Anatomist as the successor to Cuvier; but M. de Blainville restricts himself to the mere repetition of the conditions of the skeleton already argued upon by Dr. Buckland as indicating a probability that the sustaining of a heavy coat of mail was thereby provided for, affirming that the Megatherium is proved to be certainly covered with an osteodermal carapace, by the disposition of the spinous processes of the vertebrae, by the angles of the ribs, by the articulation of the pelvis with the vertebral column, etc.
   Now pending the appearance of the description of the pieces of the carapace of the Megatherium, of which the discovery is announced by M. de Blainville, and the nature of which armour is as yet unknown to science, I may be permitted to offer a few observations, tending to show that the possession of such a carapace cannot be deduced by a priori reasoning, founded on the parts of the skeleton of the Megatherium cited by M. de Blainville. And in the first place I would observe, that in reasoning from the analogy of the Armadillos,—the only quadrupeds which possess a bony carapace,—we have the advantage of having presented to our observation a skeleton which presents throughout that family a constant and unvarying series of well-marked modifications in direct relation to such a carapace as the Megatherium is stated by M. de Blainville to possess.
   Although I have cited the enormous sacrum, with its consolidated spines, and the buttress-like disposition of the strong columnar ilia, as among the modifications of the skeleton of the Armadillos which bear a physiological relation to their peculiar armour, these are by no means the most striking evidences of this relationship. What first catches the eye of the anatomist, in quest of these indications in the skeleton of the Armadillo, is the remarkable production of a process f of the vertebra: extending from above the anterior articular process on each side in an oblique direction upwards, outwards, and forwards to nearly the level of the extremity of the true spinous process]: : now these oblique processes, which are thus developed in no other quadrupeds, save the loricated Edentata, precisely and beautifully correspond in form and use with the tie-bearers in the architecture of a roof; but if we look deeper into the nature of the sustaining mechanism of the roof-like armour of the Armadillo, we shall find another purpose obtained by these processes, besides the office of the tie-bearer: the ordinary spinous process transmits the superincumbent weight simply to the vertebra from which it springs ; the oblique processes transmit the weight partly to the vertebra to which they belong and partly to the vertebra next in front, because one half of their base or origin is extended directly over the posterior oblique processes of the adjoining vertebra.
   Now if we find so peculiar, so complicated, and so perfect a mechanical modification of the vertebral column of the Armadillo, relating immediately to the peculiar weight it is required to bear, we are surely justified in expecting a corresponding modification in the same part of the skeleton of the Megatherium, on the hypothesis that it had also to sustain armour corresponding with its enormous bulk. We look in vain, however, for these long oblique columnar apophyses in the vertebral column of the extinct giant; their analogues here maintain the ordinary condition of short transverse processes* directed outwards at right angles with the spinous process f ; and the Megatherium in this respect corresponds with the hair-clad Sloths and Anteaters.	
   With respect to the ribs, I may observe that the armour of the Armadillo does not immediately rest on any part of these bones as it does on the vertebra above- mentioned : a stratum of muscular substance intervenes between the armour and ribs, and the latter are left free, and necessarily so, for the movements of respiration. The Sloths and Anteaters have broader and stronger ribs than the Armadillos ; nay, they have relatively broader and stronger ribs than the Megatherium itself, and the angles of the ribs show the rough impressions of the insertions of the levatores costarum in the same relative degree as do the angles of the ribs of the Megathere, on which M. de Blainville supposes the carapace to have directly rested.
   With respect to the relation of the bones of the extremities to a dermal armour, the difference of structure observable between the Megatherium on the one hand and the Glyptodon and Dasypi on the other, has already been pointed out. The columns supporting the trunk of the Megatherium are unquestionably of colossal proportions, but I conceive that the prodigious strength of the bones of the legs of the Megatherium was called for by the weight of the enormous superincumbent pelvis, which exceeds in the thickness and expanse of its several bones, relatively as well as absolutely, that of any other animal. And when to the weight of this ponderous cincture of bone, is added the mass of soft parts which must have encompassed and been lodged within it, I feel disposed to protest strongly against laying an additional load even upon the stalwart legs of the Megatherium.
   But if the burthen of a bony coat of mail must needs be placed upon his heavy haunches, let us endeavour to form a true conception of its expanse. If we compare the average dimensions of the component tessera of the armour of existing Armadillos with their skeletons, we shall find that there is the same correspondence between the internal and external bones of these small cuirassiers, as between the endo- and the exo-skeleton of the Glyptodon.
  In the Dasypus tricinctus, for example, the radius, which measures one inch and four lines in length, is equal to the diameter of four of the marginal plates of the dermal covering. In the Glyptodon, the radius, which measures seven inches and a half in length, is equal to three and a half of the analogous dermal ossicles, which are, therefore, relatively larger than in the Armadillo.
  But the bones of the skeleton of the Glyptodon which we have to compare with those of the Megatherium do not equal a third of the bulk of their analogues in the more gigantic Edental. If, therefore, the tesserse of the coat of mail of the Glyptodon average a breadth of two inches, then those of the hypothetical armour of the Megatherium might reasonably he expected to present a proportional magnitude : and, from the abundance of the remains of the Megathere, and the vast number of tesserae that must have entered into the formation of its expansive cuirass, hexagonal osseous plates of five or six inches diameter and proportional thickness, might be expected, if such a cuirass had really formed part of the enduring structures of the Megatherium, to have been found scattered more or less abundantly along the hanks of almost every stream that flowTs through the Pampas ; yet not a single piece of armour of a larger pattern than that of the Glyptodon has hitherto been discovered either in South or North America, where the bones of the Megatherium have occurred. And, finally, when we consider, that although parts of the armour of the Glyptodon have been discovered without bones, yet that its bones have never been found unassociated with more or less of the heavy covering in which it laid down and died, it must appear very improbable that, in every case in which the hones of the Megathere have been met with, its still heavier armour should have been entirely washed away.
   We have thus evidence of the discovery of the remains of five individuals of a large edentate species, undoubtedly covered with armour, and more or less corresponding with the characters of the genus Glyptodon, which are deduced in the present paper from the structure of both dentary and locomotive organs.
   That the portions of fossil dermal armour now in England, though exhibiting proportions which may be termed gigantic as compared with the osseous carapace of the Armadillos, belong, not to the Megatherium, but to the Glyptodon, cannot admit of doubt. It is always difficult, however, to establish a negative : but that the Megatherium possessed no analogous covering, will be also, I trust, conceded by those who may be willing to admit the validity of the arguments adduced at length in the foregoing pages, and which may be briefly summed up as follows :—
1st. The opinions of Cuvier and Weiss, in favour of the Megatherium being so armed, rest on no better ground than the mere fact of bony armour of some gigantic quadruped and the skeleton of the Megatherium having been discovered in the same continent.
2nd. The skeleton, or its parts which have been actually associated with the bony armour above mentioned, belongs to a different and smaller quadruped.
3rd. No part of the skeleton of the Megatherium presents those modifications which are related to the support of a bony dermal covering.
4th. The proportions of the component tesserae of the bony armour in question to the skeleton of the Glyptodon are the same as those between the dermal tesserae and skeleton of existing Armadillos, but are vastly smaller as compared with the bones of the Megatherium.
   5th. No bony armour composed of tesserae having the same relative size to the bones of the skeleton of the Megatherium as in the Glyptodon and existing Armadillos, has yet been discovered.
6th. The skeleton of the Megatherium has never been found associated with bony armour of any kind; neither have its parts been found so associated.


