THAT the freshwater strata of the Eocene formation in the Isle of Wight were once trodden by Pachydermatous quadrupeds, belonging to some of the extinct genera established by Cuvier from the fossils of the corresponding strata of the Paris basin, is so well-established a fact, that some apology may seem necessary for laying before the Geological Society additional evidence of the existence in the above strata of such fossils, after the discovery of the remains of Palceotherium and Anoplotherium already made by Mr. Allan and Mr. Prattf.
  Having, however, been favoured by the Rev. W. Darwin Fox with some fossil remains from Binstead and Sea-field quarries, Isle of Wight, apparently more numerous and better preserved than those which have hitherto been discovered in that locality, they seemed to possess sufficient interest to justify the present communication, as they establish not only the fact of the existence of more than one species of both Palceotherium and Anoplotherium, but likewise of the Chceropotamus Cuvieri, hitherto known only by Cuvier’s description of very imperfect fragments discovered in the gypsum quarries of Montmartre and Villejuif.
  The specimen of Chceropotamus, in Mr. Fox’s collection, is the right ramus of the lower jaw, wanting only a small portion of the symphysis and the tip of the coronoid process. 
All the teeth are present which belong to this portion of the lower jaw, excepting the second spurious molar and the incisors, if they really exist in the genus : the canine (?) is broken in the socket.
   The fragments of the Chceropotamus which Cuvier describes, consist of an incomplete base of the skull with six molar teeth on each side, and a small portion of a ramus of the lower jaw, with the canine (?) and two spurious molars.
   The form of the teeth and the flattened surface of the glenoid cavity, afford sufficient proof of the pachydermatous nature of the animal, and its close alliance to the genus Sus. But the breadth of the glenoid cavity and the expansion of the zygomatic arches are greater than in any known species of Hog ; the Peccari (Dicotyles) in these respects, as in the dental details, especially in the proportion and direction of its canine teeth, approaches nearest to the fossil.
   Now the points in which the Cuvierian fossils prove that the Chceropotamus deviates from the Peccari, are those which indicate a nearer approximation in the extinct genus to the carnivorous type ; and it is of great interest to find that the ramus of the jaw, so fortunately extracted in an almost entire state from the Isle of Wight strata, exhibits a structure, in the prolongation backwards of the angle of the jaw, which has hitherto been found to characterize, almost exclusively, the carnivorous Mammalia. Certain it is that no known pachydermatous or other ungulate species of Mammal presents this conformation. The figures (1, la, and 2, PI. IV.) preclude the necessity of a detailed description of this process; it is more compressed and deeper than in the Bear, Dog or Cat tribe, and is not bent inwards in the way which peculiarly characterizes the marsupial jawTs, and which so neatly distinguishes the Stonesfield Phascolothere. The condyloid process in the Chceropotamus is raised higher above the angle of the jaw than in the true Carnivora, and it is less convex than in the Hog or Peccari. In the size of the coronoid process the Peccari exceeds the true Hogs ; and in that respect, as well as in the form and position of its canine teeth, makes a nearer approach to the carnivorous type; but in the Chceropotamus the coronoid process is still more developed in correspondence with the greater bulk of the temporal muscle, the size of which is indicated by the span of the zygomatic arches. In the wavy outline of the inferior border of the lower jaw, the Peccari alone, amongst the Hog tribe, resembles the Chceropotamus. The two detached molars of the lower jaw described by Cuvier, and which he compares with the third and fourth molars of the Baby- roussa, are the fourth and fifth, or penultimate and antepenultimate molars, counting backwards, of the Chceropotamus, and correspond with the penultimate and antepenultimate grinders of the Peccari. The last molar of the lower jaw, in both the Peccari and Babyroussa, differs from the preceding in having two accessory, smaller and more closely approximated tubercles at the posterior part of the tooth, with a third small tubercle in the middle of the interspace between these and the next pair of tubercles. The Cuvierian fossils did not afford the means of making a comparison between the Chceropotamus and these species of the Hog tribe in this particular ; but in the present specimen we see that the last molar of the lower jawT of the Chceropotamus presents the same additional posterior tubercles as in the Peccari, and thus affords an additional corroboration of the view taken by Cuvier with regard to its affinities. The other teeth correspond in every respect with the descriptions and figures in the Ossemens Fossiles ; but the fossil here described yields another fact essential in characterizing the genus, and which the fragments in Cuvier’s possession were too imperfect to afford, viz. the exact number of molar teeth in the lower jaw, which is twelve. Of these the three posterior teeth on each side are tuberculate, or true molars; and the three anterior ones are compressed and conical, or false molars ; the latter have each two roots, and are relatively larger than in the Hog tribe. The tooth anterior to the grinders, and which from its shape Cuvier regarded as a canine, is situated closer to the symphysis of the jaw than in any of the existing Suidce ; but the Peccari, in this respect also, comes nearest to the Chceropotamus. The grinders, as in the Peccari, are narrower in the lower than the upper jaw. On the outer surface of the jaw, near its anterior extremity, the vascular foramina are numerous, as in the jaws of the Hog tribe.
  The occasional carnivorous propensities of the common Hog are well known ; and they correspond with the organization of this genus, which offers the nearest resemblance among the existing Pachyderms to the carnivorous type of structure. In the extinct Chceropotamus we have another of those beautiful examples in Palaeontology of links tending to complete a chain of affinities which the revolutions of the earth’s surface has interrupted, as it were, and for a time concealed from our view. It is interesting also to perceive that the living sub-genus of the Hog tribe which most resembles the Chceropotamus should be confined to the South American continent, where the Llama and Tapir, the nearest living analogues of the Anoplotherian and Palaeotherian associates of the Chceropotamus, now exist, and which was formerly inhabited by a genus—Macrauchenia, which connects the Llama with the Palseotheref.
   Since examining the above collection I have seen the specimen from the Bin- stead quarries, now in the Museum of the Geological Society, conjectured by Mr. Pratt to belong to a species of Ruminantia closely allied to the genus Moschus. On comparing this fossil with the corresponding part of the Moschus moschiferus, which it resembles in size, I find that the grinders are relatively broader in the fossil, and that the last molar has the third or posterior tubercle distinctly divided into two by a middle longitudinal fissure, which is not the case in the Moschus. The grinding surface is less oblique in the fossil than in the Moschus or other Ruminants ; and the form of the coronoid process of the lower jaw differs in a still greater degree than any of the above-mentioned particulars from that of the Moschus and other Ruminants, and strongly bespeaks the pachydermatous character of the fossil in question.
  Now the extinct Pachyderms of the Paris basin, besides revealing forms which, as in the case of the Chceropotamus, tend towards the ferine group of Mammalia, contain other genera, which, in the modifications of both their dental and locomotive organs, lead away in another direction, and almost complete the transition from the pachydermatous to the ruminant order.
  Among these genera the Dichobunes of Cuvier is the most remarkable, inasmuch as the posterior molars begin to exhibit a double series of cusps, of which the external present the crescentic form; and in one species (Dichob. murina, Cuv.,) the crescents are acute and compressed laterally, so that when viewed separately they might be mistaken for the teeth of a true Ruminant. In the lower jaw of the Dichobunes the penultimate and antepenultimate grinders present two pairs of cusps, the last grinder three pairs, of which the posterior are small and almost blended together, so that when worn down they appear single. In this respect, as well as in the form of the ascending ramus of the lower jaw, Cuvier, who is not prone to exaggerated expressions, observes, that the Dichobunes prodigiously resemble the young Musk-Deerf.
  Now with respect to the fragment of the lower jaw described and figured in Mr. Pratt’s memoir, there is undoubtedly a close resemblance to the Musk-Deer ; but the differences which I have pointed out forbid their association in the same genus. On the other hand, we perceive, both in the structure of the teeth and the form of the jaw, a much closer resemblance between the Isle of Wight fossil in question and the genus Dichobunes. But besides being somewhat larger than the Dich. leporinum, the ascending ramus of the lower jaw differs in form and approaches nearer to that of the true Anoplotherium. To this family (Anoplotheridce) Mr. Pratt’s interesting fossil without doubt belongs, and apparently indicates a new species, which, until the form of the anterior molars and incisors be known, might be referred to the genus Dichobunes, under the name of Dichobunes cervinum.

