MANY of the nodules of the hard rock which forms the matrix of the skull of the Dicynodon tigriceps contained bones which belonged to other parts of the skeleton : some of these have been more or less relieved from their bed, and the following are amongst the best-preserved and most intelligible specimens at present exposed.
   Vertebra.—In the first part of the present Report on the Reptilian Fossils of South Africa, I briefly noticed the biconcave structure of the vertebrse of the Dicynodon, as indicating “ a more aquatic and perhaps marine theatre of life” for these ancient African Saurians, than any existing species of that order are now known to manifest in that continent. 
   A vertebra, from the anterior part of the dorsal region, seems to belong, from the proportion which its articular surface bears to the condyle of the occiput of the Dicynodon tigriceps, to the same species, or at all events, to an individual of the same size. As it was imbedded in the same block with a skull and other bones of the Dicynodon tigriceps, it is most probably of the same species.
   The centrum and neural arch are partially anchylosed, with definite traces of the suture, which is in the usual position (n). The centrum is short; the contour of the articular surface is subcircular ; the margin is convex for about three lines, and then the surface sinks into a deep conical concavity, the apex of which nearly meets that of the concavity of the opposite articular surface. The nonarticular surface is smooth, moderately concave lengthwise, impressed at the upper and anterior angle of the centrum with the lower half of a vertically oval concave surface, for the articulation of the head of a rib.
   The base of the neurapophysis is coextensive with the centrum; as it rises, it is slightly emarginate before and behind for the outlet of the nerves, and is extended outwards in the form of an oblique ridge. The neural canal is subcircular; above its anterior outlet are the bases of a pair of zygapophyses. The strong oblique ridge which rises from the outer and fore part of the base of the neurapophysis extends backwards, as it rises, to support the diapophysis; the base of this process is of great strength, and extends outwards and rather upwards and backwards from the side of the summit of the neural arch; its free portion or extremity is broken off. The spinous process inclines a little backwards, and is compressed with a sharp anterior border.
   The following are the dimensions of this vertebra.

   This remarkable vertebra combines peculiarities borrowed, as it were, from different genera of Saurians. In the proportions of the centrum, neural arch, and spine, it resembles the vertebrae of the Plesiosaurus ; in the deep concavity of each articular end, it resembles the vertebrae of the Ichthyosaurus, the Perennibranchiate Batrachians, and Fishes. The indications of the twofold articulation of the thoracic rib, viz. by a head to the centrum and by a tubercle to the transverse process, mark an affinity to the Crocodiles and Dinosaurs, and make it probable that the Dicynodon possessed the higher structure of the heart which characterizes the Crocodilia among existing reptiles.
   Sacrum.— Of this characteristic part of the vertebral column there are two exemplifications, which are respectively either the entire sacrum of two distinct species, or are parts of the same sacrum, or of the sacrum of the same species. Each specimen consists of two vertebrae, anchylosed, and with the usual unmistakeable sacral modifications of the articular surfaces of the centrums and developments of the pleural elements. But these elements are so differently modified in each, as clearly to determine a difference of one or the other of the two kinds above mentioned. I shall first describe the sacrum, or portion of sacrum, figured in figs. 4 & 5, next that represented in figs. 6 & 7, and finally give the grounds, from the comparison of the two, which incline me to the conclusion that they are parts of the same sacrum according to the type of the Dinosauria, rather than two different sacrums with the restricted number of vertebrae characteristic of the recent and fossil Crocodilian and Lacertian reptiles.
   The specimen includes two vertebrae, the bodies of which measure together five inches in length, and are three inches across the expanded articular ends, which are nearly flat. The lower half of the anterior of these vertebrae has been broken away; what remains of the anterior expanded end is slightly concave. The head of the sacral rib (pi) is of very great breadth ; it has articulated with and become anchylosed to a thick and strong parapophysis from the side of the centrum, extending to within a short distance of its hinder end; it next becomes confluent with a broad and thick neural platform, which expands laterally into the broad depressed diapophysis, to the enlds of which are traces, in the form of raised borders, of the articulation and actual anchylosis of the tubercular part of the sacral rib. This rib then augments in breadth, diminishes in depth, and forms a depressed but strong and broad plate of bone, which is bent backwards at a right angle for the extent of seven inches, increasing again in vertical thickness after the bend, where it receives the abutment of the second sacral rib on the inner side, and on the outer side presents a rough concave surface for the iliac bone. The breadth of the neural platform where it forms the hinder zygapophyses is four inches ; the articular surface of those processes looks downwards ; the spine of the first sacral vertebra is broken ; that of the second is short, thick, expanded and truncate at the summit.
   The sacral rib of the second vertebra has a similar attachment, by its head, to the upper half of the side of the centrum, and, by the part answering to the tubercle which coalesces with the broad superincumbent neural platform, and extends outwards, expanding, chiefly in the backward direction, so as to abut upon and overlap the rib of the foregoing vertebra, and form the upper expanded part of the sacroiliac surface.
   The length of the middle part of this sacrum or portion of sacrum is between 5 and 6 inches ; the breadth is 13 inches. The body of the second sacral vertebra is subcompressed at its middle part, smooth and broadly rounded below. It terminates behind in a flat, rough, evidently fractured surface, indicative of its having been violently separated from a third anchylosed sacral vertebra.
   The second sacrum or portion of sacrum includes also two anchylosed vertebra, the bodies of which present almost the same size and form as those of the preceding specimen : their coadapted ends are completely confluent: the opposite ends are broken ; but on one of these is part of a smooth surface, which indicates it to have formed one end, probably the hinder end, of the sacrum. In each vertebra the sacral rib springs from the confluence of the centrum and neural arch, gradually contracts as it extends outwards, where it presents a full elliptical transverse section ; then again expands, meeting the similarly modified succeeding rib, with which it coalesces to form a sub-bilobed, flat, rough surface (pi) for abutment against part of a pelvic arch. In each of these sacral vertebra the neural spine expands as it ascends, and terminates in the same broad truncate surface as that of the spine of the preceding sacral specimen. It is quite certain that neither of the rib-elements of the second (portion of ?) sacrum can have been modified like the singularly expanded ribs of the first: they have been wrought out clearly and without fracture to the more slightly and normally expanded ends above described and shown in fig. 6.
   The second of the vertebras in fig. 5 shows by the termination of its centrum that it was not the last sacral vertebra ; whence it is to be inferred that the number of those in the Dicynodon exceeded two ; whilst the close correspondence between the bodies, and especially between the peculiarly shaped neural spines of the two sets of sacral vertebrae (figs. 5 & 6), leads me to the conclusion that they are anterior and posterior parts of the same sacrum, or of the sacrum of the same species. They were, however, wrought out of different fragments of the matrix, and cannot be made to fit ; so that there may be more than four vertebrce in the sacrum of the Dicynodon.
   In the series of bones appertaining, to judge by their size and associated locality, to the Dicynodon tigriceps, are two belonging to the arches that have supported the fore and hind limbs.
   One of these is a single, broad, and flat bone, with part of the cavity for the head of the proximal long bone of the limb, showing at the lower half of its circumference an elongated rough surface, apparently for synchondrosis with the other elements of the arch contributing to complete that cavity : on one side of the more expanded part of the bone is an extensive rough surface apparently for similar ligamentous junction with another part of the skeleton. The other bone (fig. 1) exhibits the entire cavity for the proximal bone of its limb, and is obviously composed of the vertebral (or pleural) and sternal (or haemal) elements of the arch anchylosed where they constitute that articular cavity, traces of the obliterated suture being there discernible.
   According to the analogy of the Reptilia, the longer and narrower of the two constituents of the last-cited arch should be the pleural one, the broader and shorter the haemal element; and this latter likewise exhibits a foramen (o) near the articular cavity which may either be interpreted as an ‘ obturator foramen,’ or an homologue of the foramen which is found in the coracoid of the Crocodiles, of the Monitors (Varanus), and of many other Reptiles, recent and fossil.
  Pelvic arch.—The bone represented in figure 1, resembles in its general proportions the coracoid of the Megalosaurus. The anchylosed condition of the two parts of the arch where they form the articular cup in fig. 1. renders it most probable, however, that they belong to the pelvis, and I, provisionally, regard them as the left ‘ os innominatum ’ of the Dicynodon. The pleural element or ‘ilium’ (a,b,c) is an inequilateral triangular plate of bone, with the lower angle thickened and expanded, especially externally, to form the upper half of the acetabulum. Its anterior border (a, b) is the longest, nearly straight, and moderately thick and rounded : the upper border, or ‘ crista,’ soon becomes thin on quitting the. angle a, and is continued backwards and downwards, with a slight degree of convexity, and at an acute angle with the anterior border. The hinder or lower border is short, concave, and rapidly thickens as it approaches the acetabular cavity. The outer surface of the ilium is slightly concave and smooth : the anterior or antero-lateral surface is narrow, and divided by a broad ridge of bone from the inner surface, which shows many longitudinal and slightly converging grooves near the thin margin, indicative of the junction with the expanded ribs of the first and second sacral vertebrae, which I suppose to have abutted against or overlapped this part of the ilium. ,The posterior angle of the ilium appears to have projected backwards. The haemal element of the pelvic arch, consisting seemingly of a confluent ischium and pubis, forms a strong and thick subsemicircular plate of bone, moderately concave externally, convex at its upper part and upper inner part, slightly convex vertically and slightly concave transversely, in the rest of the inner surface, which formed part of the wall of the pelvic canal. Near the convexity, answering to what is termed the brim of the pelvis in Mammalia, is an elliptical foramen, 1 inch by 1 inch, in long and short diameters : it is the commencement of a canal, which perforates the bone obliquely downwards and forwards, opening externally below the thickened part of the pelvic brim, and about two inches from the acetabulum, at o. The brim of the pelvis becomes thinner as it approaches the symphysis pubis (s, s) ; and it has been more extended apparently outwards, but has been here fractured. The symphysial surface is semielliptic or reniform, 6 inches in length, 3 inches across at its broadest part, forming an acute angle with the outer surface, which it thus meets by a sharp border : the lower part of the ischio-pubic bone is continued at an obtuse angle from the symphysial border, is at first thin, and then becomes thickened to form the projecting, strong, roughened angle, answering to the ischial tuberosity (t). The space between this process and the posterior superior spine of the ilium (c) forms a part answering to the great ischiadic notch in Mammalia. Some traces of the original suture between the ilium and the ischio-pubic plate are discernible in the articular cavity.
The following are the dimensions of the above-described os innominatum.
  Scapular Arch.—The bone represented in fig. 2, s, g, & fig. 3, is either a scapula, or a 'coracoid.’ Its glenoid or articular process is subtriangular, 5 inches by inches in the long and short diameters, divided at its extremity into a symphvsial surface for articulation with the scapula, and into the portion of the glenoid articular cavity. The bone, as it extends from this twofold articular end, contracts, and chiefly in transverse diameter, to a subcompressed neck, thickest and rounded behind, 3 inches 9 lines in fore-and-aft diameter, 2 inches in thickness, 5 inches in vertical extent at the back part, and 2 inches in the same dimensions at the fore part. The bone above this constriction suddenly expands into a broad semioval strong plate ; 12 inches in antero-posterior extent, 6 inches in vertical diameter, and about 2 inches thick at its thickest part (s). This plate extends about 2 inches in advance of the neck, and terminates anteriorly in a convex border ; from this part it increases in vertical extent to the middle of the bone, and continues slightly diminishing to the hinder border, which is nearly vertical: the upper border is moderately convex, and the angle is rounded off by which it passes into the hinder border. The whole outer surface of the expanded plate of the bone is slightly concave.
   The inner surface, fig. 3, is moderately convex, and a great proportion of it, including the whole fore-and-aft extent and 5 inches vertically, is occupied by a rough irregular, apparently synchondrosal surface. This structure, with the modifications of the ilium and sacral ribs before described, indicates the power of the Dicynodon to support and move itself upon dry land, like the Crocodiles, and to a degree probably equalling that of the Dinosaurs.
   Supposing the above-described bone to be a 1 scapula, there is, then, a third bone, c, p, fig. 2, perforated like the ischio-pubic bone, but differing in shape. It may be a coracoid bone: it bears a certain resemblance to the coracoid of the Iguanodon.
  Humerus or Femur.—Of the long bones of the extremities, the most intelligible is one which is remarkable for the slenderness of the shaft in comparison with the extreme expansion of its distal end ; fig. 4. The shaft is trihedral, with the angles rounded off, 3 inches in its longest diameter about an inch above the beginning of the expansion of the distal end. The fractured surface, here, shows no trace of a medullary cavity. From one side of this part of the shaft a strong ridge is continued outwards and downwards, which expands as it descends ; it resembles the supinator ridge of the humerus in carnivorous Mammalia. The condyle which swells out anterior to this ridge is convex and of large size. The outer part of the other and smaller condyle has been broken away ; the under part of the condyles is gently concave from side to side: the back part of the expanded end is very slightly concave, so far as it is preserved, but the whole border of the lower and back part of the expanded end of the bone is broken away. The breadth of the distal end of this bone, as mutilated, is 7 inches; its circumference nearly 18 inches; the circumference of the shaft being 7 inches.


