
Introduction.
In the following pages two memoirs are embodied. One of them, read before the Society in February 1834, gave a short account of some of the principal faults and disturbances of the Coalbrook Dale coal-field; the other, read April 1836, described the several formations comprised in that district, as well as certain phaenomena exhibited by the coal-measures, and not noticed in the former communication.
Before I proceed, it is necessary to observe, that prior to the researches of Mr. Murchison into the formations between the carboniferous rocks and the slates of Wales, the examination of the Coalbrook Dale district was attended with very considerable difficulties. A few of the rocks, which crop out against the flanks of the Wrekin, had been ascertained to be counterparts of others; but their order of superposition and relative antiquity had not been determined.
Mr. Murchison’s labours, however, have removed these difficulties, by showing-, that the thin zones of gray and liver-coloured sandstones, shales, and limestones, which overlie the limestone at Wenlock, and underlie the coal- measures at Madeley, Broseley, &c., are referable to the Ludlow rocks, the first formation beneath the old red sandstone, and constituting, with the Wenlock limestone and shale, the upper Silurian group ; and that the shelly sandstone at Morrell’s Wood, as well as the quartzose grit, and dark-coloured flags at the base of the Wrekin, belong to the Caradoc sandstone, or lower Silurian rocks.
The deposits just noticed form, in this district, the terminating points of the formations, which having thinned out from their full developement in South Shropshire, Montgomeryshire, Radnorshire, &c., merely constitute, in the neighbourhood of the Wrekin, small and irregular masses, possessing but few of the characters, which distinguisli them elsewhere.
These changes have tended to produce considerable intricacy in the geology of this interesting and beautiful district, where, within a few miles, we find a nearly complete epitome of the carboniferous and Silurian systems.
I beg leave to acknowledge most particularly Mr. Murchison’s kindness, in affording me every assistance respecting the Silurian series. I am also indebted to that gentleman for the use of a valuable, manuscript Ordnance Map, on which the heights of the principal hills were marked. This document has been of very great service to me in constructing the sections.
Mr. Arthur Aikin, in his memoir on the Geology of the South-Western part of Shropshire*, gives a general sketch of this portion of the countiy. To the accuracy and value of the mineralogical details given in that memoir, I can bear ample testimony; but the extent to which the coal-field was worked at the period of his visit, about twenty years since, was much less than it is now ; and he was consequently prevented from entering into those details, for which his ability and perseverance so well qualified him.
Dr. Townsonf has given many interesting particulars of the mineralogy of Shropshire; and some notice has likewise been taken of it by the Rev. Mr. Plimleyj:.
During the whole of my researches, I experienced from all parties much attention and courtesy. To Mr. Anstice, of Madeley, I am particularly indebted for a constant readiness and kindness in furthering my inquiries. By being permitted at all times to examine his fine collection of fossils from the coal-measures, I have been enabled to add considerably to my catalogue of organic remains; and it was in certain nodules in his cabinet, that I discovered the two impressions, which Dr. Buckland has since shown to belong to coleopterous insects*. Mr. Anstice’s long practical acquaintance with the Madeley coal-field, enabled him also to favour me with many interesting particulars respecting the Madeley and Limestone faults ; and I am indebted to him for the excellent sections of the Madeley Pits.
I must likewise acknowledge the assistance, which I received during the progress of my inquiries, from the Messrs. Pritchard and Mr. J. Onions of Broseley, Mr. Thomson of Lightmore, Messrs. Darby of the Dale, Mr. Hombersley of Prior’s Lee, and Mr. Jones of New Hadley. The ground- baililfs throughout the whole district, always evinced much civility and readiness in accompanying me over their works, and giving me every information in their power.
I cannot conclude without expressing my grateful obligations to Mr. Lonsdale, to whose kind suggestions and constant assistance, I feel very greatly indebted.
Extent and Physical Features.
The district to be described, is included within an acute-angled triangle, the termination of the zone of Silurian and carboniferous rocks, which ranges through Wales, Herefordshire, &c. This apex of the triangle, near Newport, points about N.N.E.; and its two longer sides, ranging respectively about S.W. and S., are flanked by the new red sandstone. The coal-measures extend from the acute apex of the triangle at Church Aston, near Newport, to Steeraway, a distance of seven miles; and they attain their greatest breadth, l miles, in the parallel of the latter locality. At this point, the Silurian rocks gradually swell out, and reduce, as we proceed southward, the coal-measures to an irregular and decreasing band, which at Tasley, near Bridgenorth, is only three-quarters of a mile in breadth. The total length of the coal-field from Church Aston to Tasley is 15 miles; its area is about 32 square miles; and that of the whole district to be described is about 100 square miles. (See Map, PI. XXXV.)
The surface, occupied by the Silurian and carboniferous rocks within the triangle, is considerably higher than the surrounding country, composed of the new red system. To the east, the surface of this system is undulated and diversified, and gradually decreases in altitude as it recedes from the older rocks ; but to the north and north-west, the higher platform of the coal- measures descends rapidly into the lowlands of the new red system.
At Watling Street, near Wellington, commence the lofty igneous axes of the Ercal and Wrekin, Steeraway and Maddox, which constitute the boundary in this portion of the area, and separate the coal-measures from the new red sandstone.
On the south-west no physical feature bounds the district; but the reader may supply this deficiency, by drawing a line from the end of the Wrekin to Wenlock Edge, and thence to Bridgenorth.
Having thus defined, generally, the limits of the districts, 1 will describe briefly, the principal physical features within them.
The Severn divides the area into two unequal portions. Where it enters the district from the west, it traverses a valley in the Caradoc sandstone, one of the Lower Silurian rocks ; it then passes through a narrow and beautiful valley of Wenlock shale, flanked on the north by the hills of Little Wenlock and Sunnyside, and on the south by the finely wooded and precipitous escarpments of Wenlock Edge, Gleedon Hill, Tickwood Hill, and Bentball Edge. Near Coalbrook Dale the valley rapidly contracts, and the Severn enters a deep and narrow gorge in the Wenlock limestone, separating Benthall Edge from Lincoln Hill. This gorge passes immediately into the coal-measures, and intersects them for about two miles, to Coalport. A little beyond that point, the river turns southward, and is bounded on the left by an escarpment of new red sandstone, and on the right by hills of coal-measures, as far as the Wren’s Nest, beyond which it flows through precipitous ridges, wholly composed of the new red system. Between Coalport and Bridgenorth the hills are beautifully wooded, and intersected by numerous glens. To the south of the Severn, the country is so traversed by deep valleys and ravines, that, with the exception of Wenlock Edge, no connected ridge of hills can be traced. The leading features, however, are, the fine and bold escarpments of Wenlock and Benthall Edges, and Sherlot Hill, which, rising to the height of 731 feet, constitutes the greatest elevation of the coal-measures, in this portion of the field. To the north of the Severn, the surface is less generally broken, the part occupied by the coal-measures, presenting an elevated and undulating outline, which averages about 400 feet above the level of the sea, or 300 feet above that of the Severn at the Iron Bridge. Their greatest elevation is 746 feet. The most prominent features in this portion of the field are the Wrekin, which rises to the height of 1320 feet above the level of the sea, and the parallel easterly ranges of igneous rocks and mountain limestone, and of Lilleshall Hill, at the northern apex of the field. Some of the other irregularities of outline will be noticed in describing the faults.
The coal-field was once thickly wooded; and in the names of many localities, as Broseley Wood, Cow Wood, Donnington Wood, &c., are preserved the remembrance of that state of the surface, though they now present a far different scene. The trees are replaced by engines and furnaces, and the green sod by pit-mounds, destitute of the slightest verdure; still, with the exception of a portion of the coal-field, the country around Coalbrook Dale is extremely beautiful and picturesque, and I know few parts of the kingdom which, within so limited an area, present a greater diversity of fine scenery.
The highly-cultivated lowlands to the north—the noble valley of Shrewsbury, bounded by the Welsh mountains, and irrigated by the winding Severn and the numerous bold escarpments and woody dingles, which skirt and branch off from the banks of that river, present a continual change of romantic and picturesque scenery.
The boundary of the coal-measures reposes successively on several members of the carboniferous and Silurian systems. At Lilleshall, it rests upon carboniferous limestone; between that point and Steeraway Hill, it abuts against the new red sandstone; and from Steeraway to Little Wenlock, it overlies the highly-inclined outcrop of the carboniferous limestone. Turning thence eastward by Harris Coppice to the Dale, it reposes upon the Wenlock shale, and at Lincoln Hill upon the Wenlock limestone. Crossing the Severn, the coal- measures are displayed resting on the Wenlock limestone of Benthall Edge, to the south-east of which they overlie the Ludlow rocks as far as Linley hill, where they are in contact with the old red sandstone, but a little to the eastward of Linley Hall they again repose, for a short distance, on Ludlow rocks. Throughout the remainder of the district, to the south on to Tasley, they overlie the old red sandstone. At Barrow and Sherlot Hill are two outliers of coal- measures, the former resting partly on Ludlow rocks, and partly on old red sandstone, and the latter wholly on the old red. Along the entire eastern boundary of the field, the carboniferous strata abut against or dip under the new red system.
Thus the coal-measures repose upon carboniferous limestone, old red sandstone, the several divisions of the Ludlow rocks, the Wenlock limestone, and shale, and occasionally on trap. 
I will now proceed to describe each formation, commencing with the oldest sedimentary deposits.
This division of the great system, worked out by Mr. Murchison in the border counties of England and Wales, is in the Coalbrook Dale district, but imperfectly developed. Its lower member is a coarsely-grained quartzose grit, which forms a belt around the trap of the Wrekin, Ercal, and Lilleshall hills. The strata incline at a high angle against their flanks, but the dip rapidly decreases as we recede from them. Portions of the rock disintegrate rapidly, owing to its broken state and loose texture ; but the sandstone or grit is frequently very pure, and occasionally so free from iron, that it has been quarried for the use of the china manufactory at Coalport. Mr. Murchison attributes its clear white colour and friable texture, to the action of the igneous rocks which protrude through it. Between the Wrekin and the Ercal it presents the appearance of a gravel, composed of small angular fragments of hard grit, mixed with a few larger masses, and coloured, as well as slightly cemented, by the peroxide of iron. As far as my observation extended, this rock does not contain any organic remains. At the south-eastern extremity of the Wrekin, near the road from Leighton to Wenlock, and in a quarry by the road side, at the eastern entrance of the glen, which divides the Wrekin and the Ercal hills, there reposes upon this quartzose grit,, a dark greenish micaceous flag, the mica being so abundant at a pit, on the western side of the lower Wrekin, that the rock disintegrates into a fine powder. It is, however, generally small-grained and hard, breaking into rhomboidal masses. At the second quarry between the Wrekin and Ercal hills, the flagstone is in immediate contact with the basalt, which has tilted it into a nearly vertical position ; but the general dip of this rock is conformable to that of the underlying grits. I could discover in it no trace of fossils. The strata in the immediate vicinity of the Wrekin and Ercal are so broken and shattered by the protrusion of the igneous rocks, that it is extremely difficult to trace their continuity ; and the schist is not often exposed, although it may probably form a narrow belt, from ten to twenty yards broad, parallel to the underlying grits.
As we recede from the Wrekin, coarse- and fine-grained ochreous and greenish sandstones, alternating with beds of light gray clay, dark gray and liver-coloured shales, and impure gray limestones, make their appearance. These beds have been recognized by Mr. Murchison, as belonging to the Caradoc Sandstone.
They range on the eastern side of the Wrekin, and parallel to its major axis, from near Watling Street to Leighton and Shineton, and thence southward. The dip varies considerably, either conforming to the flanks of the numerous masses of trap, or to that of the subjacent grits and schistose flags.
This rock is well characterized by its organic remains, which are numerous in the bands of limestone; the most common being the Pentamerus Icevis, Orthisalternata and Tentaculites annulatus,with several Crinoideaand corals. Mr. Murchison mentions many new species of Pentamerus, Nucula, Orthis, and Trilobites, as characteristic of the deposit in other districts.
In the neighbourhood of Leighton Hurst and Morel's Wood the Caradoc sandstone disappears under a calcareous shale, belonging to this formation.
It is well and extensively developed, and rises from below the Wenlock limestone, which constitutes the upper part of the escarpment of Wenlock Edge, Benthall Edge, and Lincoln Hill. The shale, in each instance, forms the base of the range, and extends across the valley of the Severn to the escarpment of the coal measures, below which it disappears. Good sections of it are exposed along the banks of most of the brooks by which it is intersected, and on the sides of the Severn, at Buildwas. It is uniformly a thin, laminated, calcareo-argillaceous shale, sometimes, finely micaceous, and it occasionally contains nodules, and a few thin, subordinate beds of impure limestone. Its colour varies from light greenish gray to light liver. It is tenacious and adhesive when wet; but when dry, it splits into imperfectly rhomboidal masses, having an earthy fracture. It has been proved to extend as far north as Lightmoor, where, at a depth of eighty yards, and underlying the coal-measures, Mr. Thompson met with a calcareous shale, which, by its fossils, I recognised as the Wenlock shale. Its organic remains are numerous and beautifully preserved. Among the most characteristic in the neighbourhood of Coalbrook Dale are, Asaphus caudatus, common in groups in the upper part of this formation, Orthis testudinaria, (Sow.), Orthoceras annulatum, (Sow.), and Terebratulce, with a few crinoidea and corals.
The Wenlock Limestone. (Pi. XXXV. and XXXVI., figs. 9 to u.)
The Wenlock shale passes gradually upwards into the Wenlock limestone, which presents a steep escarpment over the vale formed of the shale. The limestone ranges through the district in a narrow belt from Lincoln Hill to Much Wenlock, and thence in a south-westerly direction into Wales, Southward of Much Wenlock, the limestone escarpment has a very regular strike south-west and north-east, and the strata at the outcrop, along its summit, dip about 25° south-east, the inclination decreasing in following the direction of the dip. About two miles north of Much Wenlock, the escarpment is broken through by numerous transverse glens, marking the range of large faults; and the strata dip in all directions. The synclinal line along Parly Glen, and the dome-shaped structure of Tickwood, resulted apparently from these fractures and disturbances.
The belt of limestone reassumes its usual regularity at Benthall Edge, with a strike E.N.E. and a dip from 20° to 25° S.S.E. At the large quarry about midway along this ridge, the basseting edges of the limestone dip at an angle of 26° S.S.E., but the dip rapidly decreases as the strata recede from their outcrop, being only 16° at the distance of 70 feet from that point; and still further in the same direction, the strata are comparatively horizontal, and are overlaid unconformably by the coal-measures.
This arrangement prevails the whole length of the escarpment, but at Lincoln Hill, the strata, instead of forming, as at Benthall Edge, a short and rapid curve, are very singularly contorted. These undulations are well exposed in the limestone caverns, in the eastern flanks of the hill, and extend along the plane of the rock to a depth of 100 yards from its basset. The strata dip at an angle of about 55° for the first few yards ; they then begin to curve gradually ; but about 80 yards from the outcrop the undulations present a series of very slightly convex planes, 20 yards in breadth, and separated by rapid, step-formed descents, from 4 to 6 yards in the fall, and the apex of the curves exhibiting no fracture in the limestone.
The escarpment of this rock finally disappears below the coal-measures, near Castle Green, and though it does not crop out, it has been proved to continue as an underground ridge in the same direction, at several coal-pits lying in that plane in the parish of Madeley. 
The upper beds of the Wenlock limestone are thin and argillaceous, and of a light gray or blue colour. In proportion as the series descend, so the strata are thicker and more compact. The central beds are extensively quarried, both for agricultural purposes and the iron furnaces. At Wenlock, Gleedon Hill, and Tickwood they are extremely pure, of a very light gray colour, but sometimes tinged or rather speckled of a light flesh colour, owing to the imbedded Encrinites. The structure is concretionary and the fracture conchoidal. The masses which constitute the strata frequently form large, irregularly-rounded blocks, highly crystalline and pure. They are termed hailstones,” and form an excellent flux for the ironstone. The lower strata of this limestone are well exposed in the numerous quarries along Benthall Edge and at Lincoln Hill. Their colour is dark bluish gray, and their texture is more earthy than the central strata, which are also much thicker bedded. Strongly-defined lines of cleavage or joints traverse this limestone ; and are well exhibited in the quarries at Benthall Edge, one set ranging nearly at right angles to the strike of the rock, and the other almost parallel to it. The direction of the first is nearly true north and south ; that of the second about 12° S. of west and 12° N. of east. At the Vineyards,” (half a mile further westward,) where the strike is a few degrees more south, the direction of the joints is still the same. At Gleedon Hill, they hold a similar course, whilst the dip is 12° north ; but, at Bradley, intermediate between these two places, the dip is about 8° W.S.W., and the cleavage is apparently nearly N.W. and S.E. This district is, however, so much disturbed, that it is difficult to arrive at any certain conclusion.
Mineralogical Contents.—In the Wenlock limestone, there are no ores in sufficient quantity to repay the working. Crystallized carbonate of lime occurs in the seams and partings of the strata, frequently forming beautiful rhombic, tetrahedral, and hexahedral crystals. Flesh-coloured sulphate of barytes, splitting into rhombic crystals, is common in the fissures of the limestone at Benthall Edge. Small crystals of sulphate of copper are occasionally disseminated upon the crystals of carbonate of lime; and the sulphurets of iron, copper, and lead are met with in small lumps and in thin filaments in the lower part of the limestone. The peroxide of manganese also occasionally fills up small cavities and fissures in the rock. In the central beds are sometimes found geodes of a very pure limestone, the cavities of which are lined with beautiful crystals of calcareous spar.
Organic Remains of the JVenlock Limestone.
Fossils abound in this formation, and are in general extremely well preserved, especially the corals which are found in the central limestone at Gleedon Hill. In that portion of the formation are beds, sometimes more than 20 feet thick, composed almost entirely of remains of Crinoidea, of white and pink colours, the limestone thereby acquiring a curious, speckled appearance. The substance of the corals is frequently replaced also by a pure, semitransparent pinkish carbonate of lime, which has beautifully preserved the most delicate internal structure. In the lower beds, Crinoidea are much less numerous, occurring only in detached fragments between the strata ; but they contain great abundance of Favosites, and several species of Eumophalus, Leptaena, and Pleurotomaria. In the uppermost beds organic remains are less abundant than in the middle or lowest, and are almost entirely confined to Testacea.
The following is the list of the fossils procured by me in this district:
In this and other lists of Silurian fossils, only those species are included which were found by myself, and of those only a portion, a great number not being yet described. I must refer to Mr. Murchison’s work on the Silurian System for complete catalogues ; see also the list p. 490.
Mr. Murchison, after determining the geological position of this zone of rocks, examined it as far as Much Wenlock, and along the New Cut at The Dean near Broseley ; I have traced its prolongation from Much Wenlock to near Apley, at various points, where they have been protruded from beneath the coal-measures by the action, which produced the great faults that traverse this district.
The lowest division consists of greenish gray, slightly micaceous, soft sandstone and flags, with calcareous shales and impure limestone, inclosing a few casts of a Pentamerus and an Atrypa. It appears in the valley of Much Wenlock, whence it ranges to Wyke, but it disappears at Posenal, underneath the coal-measures; below which, however, it trends through Broseley to Made- ley, and parallel to the strike of the Wenlock limestone. The gorge of the Severn exposes a small portion of this rock at the Iron Bridge. It has been met with in the meadow-pits in Madeley parish and at the Tuckiss, Balls, and other pits in Broseley parish. It also crops out from below the coal-measures in the lower part of Darley Brook, and it ranges thence to within a quarter of a mile of the new red sandstone, and passes gradually into the next division.
The middle division or the Aymestry limestone, is formed of very thin and rough beds of light gray and bluish, lumpy limestone, with a few seams of clay ; and is characterized by a great abundance of Terebratula PVilsoni, many of which are detached between the layers of limestone; and by a few corals. It is well exposed along the New Cut near Broseley, between Dean and The Dean, where it is brought up by a S. W. and N.E. slightly-developed anticlinal line, the prolongation of which may be seen at several places, along the slope of the hill, and particularly at Willey Church. I have traced this deposit from the New Cut to Willey, also in the bed of Dailey Brook; and the junction strata between it and the upper divisions, again appear on the side of the lane leading from Barrow to Posenal; it may be traced thence by Ash Coppice, dipping 10° E.S.E. along the summit of the hills, to the east of Much Wenlock, where it forms a range parallel to the limestone escarpment of W'enlock Edge. From The Dean, it passes below the coal-measures to nearly opposite Swinney Mill, on the side of the Severn, and close adjoining the out-crop of the new red sandstone, where it has been found at a depth of 40 yards, underlying the lower coal-measures. At Aymestry, the limestone passes upwards into thin beds of a yellow, deeply ferruginous, very soft, and fissile sandstone, full of the Orlhis lunata, Leptcena (Producta) lata, Cypricardia undata, and Terebratula lacunosa.
The upper division. The beds above mentioned rapidly give way to the sandstones of this division ; the lower beds of which are light-coloured, thin- bedded, frequently very micaceous and fissile; and sometimes very much resemble the lower sandstones of the coal-measures*. The upper beds are occasionally highly micaceous and of a deeper colour.
The junction of this formation and the old red sandstone is well exposed near Callaughton, where the former is exhibited in several quarries. Thence it ranges to Wenlock Walton and Barrow Hill, dipping at an angle of about 8° under the old red sandstone. It is again brought to day on the summit of Breakneck and Willey hills, by the Swinney fault throwing it into juxtaposition with the coal-measures, which at the Dean’s Corner, appear at the base of the last-mentioned hill. (See PI. XXXVI., Section 13.) It then ranges under the thin capping of coal-measures at Linley Green Hill, and reappears at Linley Hall. In the brook below the Hall, good sections of itare exposed, overlaid by the old red sandstone, the beds being nearly horizontal or dipping very slightly S.S.W. From that locality, it extends almost to the Frog Mill near Coalmoor. This division is marked by a great paucity of organic remains; a Lingula and an Avicula being, though of rare occurrence, the characteristic fossils.
The formation is traversed by two sets of joints, the one ranging from N. 12° E. and S. 12° W. and the other W.S.W. and E.N.E. nearly.
The limited development of the Ludlow rocks in the district under examination, precludes an extensive list of the organic remains; and although the different divisions are well marked throughout, by the presence of several characteristic fossils, yet a great number of those, which Mr. Murchison describes as abounding further to the south, are here wanting.
THE OLD RED SANDSTONE.
This formation skirts the southern parts of the coal-field, reposing on the Ludlow rocks, and occasionally underlying the coal-measures. Along the edges of the former, to the S.E. of Much Wenlock, it consists of a very dark red clay, alternating with rather hard, dark red, speckled, or gray micaceous and fissile sandstones, and with thin beds of a gray, micaceous marl. In the red sandstone (dipping 12° S.E.) at Wenlock Walton, I found casts of the Lingula cornea, a characteristic fossil of the tilestone, or lowest division of the old red sandstone. In the lane to the southward of, and just below Barrow, the same beds are nearly horizontal, but I found no fossils. The old red sandstone here occupies a low tract, about one-third of a mile broad, insulating the outlier of coal measures on Shalot Hill. It then ranges around the base of Willey Hill and Linley Hill to Holly Bush, where a narrow tongue of it stretches eastward into the coal-measures. From the last locality, it may be traced, underlying the coal measures which cap the hills from Nordley, to Tasley. Dark red clays and marls predominate throughout the district, but they contain subordinate beds of coarse, highly micaceous, gray and red sandstones. The strata to the south and west are so covered with drift, that they can rarely be seen. It thus appears, that the old red sandstone reaches no further north than Barrow and Willey; and that at this extreme point, the lower division or the tilestones of Mr. Murchison, is moderately developed only in the western side, and that the spotted argillaceous marls and deep red clays, with their subordinate beds of sandstone, occupy the greater portion of the district forming the base of Shirlot Hill.
CARBONIFEROUS LIMESTONE.

In the south of the field, the coal-measures have been shown to repose upon old red sandstone or Silurian rocks; but as we proceed north, the carboniferous limestone is gradually developed. Between Harris’s Coppice and Little Wenlock, a very thin bed of limestone crops out from below the coal-measures, and abuts, to the north, against the trap of Little Wenlock. The limestone* again appears, in increased importance, to the north-west of Little Wenlock, constituting a singularly displaced band in the midst of the coal-measures, and extending northward about one mile, in which direction it passes, with a slight dip, conformably under the coal strata, whilst to the east and west it abuts against them. (Map, PI. XXXV.) The true outcrop of the limestone ranges from the south-west of the trap of Little Wenlock by the Oldfield works, reposing upon the Caradoc sandstone and trapf, and thence trends N.N.E. to the Hatch and Steeraways, cropping out from under the coal-measure, and rising against the ridge of trap, at an angle of 40°at the Hatch, and of 25° at Steeraways. At the latter place its thickness is considerably increased, as is proved by the following section:

In the road leading; from the Hatch to the Wrekin, and in some other places, the superposition of this limestone on beds of trap, with their rise against the igneous axis of the Steeraways, is well exhibited. From Steeraways to Lilles- hall the limestone is not exposed ; but at the latter place, it forms a narrow band about 1^ mile in length, overlying the trap and Silurian rocks, and rising from beneath the coal-measures. It abuts against new red sandstone on the west. The dip varies from N.E. to E.and is at different angles.
The north end of this wedge of limestone exhibits an apparently anticlinal line in the prolongation of the major axis of Lilleshall Hill, whence it might be supposed, that the limestone wraps all round that hill, but there is nothing further to support this hypothesis. The anticlinal dip takes place within a few yards of the Lilleshall fault, ranging parallel to it, and might therefore have been produced by the lateral pressure of the new red sandstone. The limestone at its outcrop near Lilleshall, is capped by a few yards of fissile sandstone, belonging to the coal-measures, which from the northward dip of the strata, rapidly acquire a greater importance, though not sufficiently to bring in the productive measures. This zone of limestone gradually decreases in width by the convergence of the Lilleshall and great east faults, and near Church Ashton it disappears in consequence of these faults meeting. 
Between Lilleshall and the pool at the bottom of the Hadley inclined plane, no sinkings have been made, which could point out exactly its course below the coal-measures : in digging “the pool,” however, the limestone is said to have been met with, striking parallel to the fault. It was reached also in a pit sunk by Mr. Hombersley about half a mile south of Watling Street, at a depth of 80 yards, and in a nearly horizontal position. At Steeraways the limestone has been traced only a few yards below the coal measures; but its range under them has been lately confirmed, by its having been noticed rising to the surface at the Horsehays, in the centre of the coal-field. Owing to its rapid dip to the N.E. and small development, it has not been worked, and its further prolongation therefore is not positively known. Nevertheless there is no doubt that the carboniferous limestone immediately underlies the coal-measures from Little Wenlock to Lilleshall. (See PI. XXXVI., Sections 5 to 7, 13 and 14.)
At Little Wenlock and Steeraways the upper beds of the limestone are very thin, argillaceous, and of a bluish gray colour. As the strata descend they become purer, but still contain much alumina and silica, which cause the lime, made from this rock, to set well under water. It is quarried for several iron furnaces. At the above places and at Lilleshall, the lime rock is subordinate to beds of sandstone. At Lilleshall the deposit is much thicker than at Steeraways, being 60 yards, and it is also purer and generally of a lighter colour. The upper beds are dark gray and the lower nearly white; but they are all subcrystalline and hard. The partings between them are frequently composed of a red ochrey clay, which generally colours both the broken limestone and the workmen’s dress. The following is a rough list of the strata at Lilleshall given me by Mr. Bolls :

The Grum is of a peculiar character, having rather the appearance of a conglomeratic, mechanical deposit, than the homogeneous composition usually prevalent in limestone rocks. The white bed (12.) is reckoned superior as a flux for the ironstone to any other in the country. The gray limestone (14.) is noted for forming a cement which hardens well under water. The average
specific gravity of this stone is about 2 685. The organic remains of this carboniferous limestone are neither so nu-
merous nor so well preserved as those of the Wenlock rocks. This may be partly owing to the difference of mineralogical composition between the two formations. In the older deposit, the pure carbonate of lime of which it consists, has infiltrated into the minutest pores of the fossils ; whilst at Steeraways and Lilleshall the great admixture of silica and alumina has given an earthy texture to all the organic remains. The fossils differ also considerably in their distribution. At Steeraways the Leptana (Producta) gigantea, and Lithostrotion flortforme of Fleming, are abundant; while at Lilleshall, Crinoidea and Cyathophyllum are the most common ; but Leptama hemispherica is especially characteristic of the "grum.”

The following is a list of the more abundant fossils obtained by myself:
In the foregoing pages, I have confined my observations to the range and structure of the formations underlying the coal-measures, deferring all remarks on the dislocations by which they are affected to a subsequent chapter, in which I purpose to describe the faults and their accompanying phenomena. The probable distance to which the different underlying formations may extend below the coal-measures, will be considered in the conclusion. I will now proceed to the examination of the coal-field of Coalbrook Dale—a field, characterized by the variety and singularity of its organic remains, as well as by the great disturbances which it has undergone.
Owing to the hilly nature of the country, some excellent sections of the coal-measures are exhibited. On the sides of the deep gorge through which the Severn flows from the Iron Bridge to Bridgenorth, the coal-measures, the Wenlock limestone, and new red sandstone, are well exposed. At Woom- bridge, Lawley, and Coalmoor, are several open works of the Penneystone and sulphur coal. The flint-coal sandstone, so full of fine vegetable remains, is extensively quarried at Ketley. The lowest strata crop out in the side of the road at the top of the Dale, also at Steeraways, the Hatch, the Dunge, near Broseley, and in the various dingles south of the Severn. The upper strata are more rarely exposed. The heaps of the different ironstones at the pit’s mouth afford, especially when long exposed, excellent opportunities for obtaining organic remains.
The measures are composed of the usual alternations of shales, sandstones, and coals, with, occasionally, subordinate calcareous beds. In the upper part of the series, unproductive marls, shales, and slightly calcareous, thick-bedded sandstones predominate; and in the lower part, shales containing ironstones, hard sandstones, sometimes conglomeratic, and numerous seams of coal. The colours of the upper strata are generally light gray, yellow, or red; some of the central beds are extremely dark, whilst the colours of the numerous lower sandstones are usually very light. Such are the general lithological characters; but they are subject to considerable local variations, which will be detailed hereafter.
It is difficult (o state accurately the total thickness of the coal-measures, as there is no shaft section in which the entire series from the new red sandstone is exhibited. From the care with which Mr. Anstice has had the sections of the pits at Madeley taken,, they afford the most correct information of the number of strata, and of the total thickness of the coal-measures. The details from which the following summaries have been deduced, were in part supplied by that gentleman.
As the higher strata in these works, and those of Madeley, are quite unproductive, and probably constitute the uppermost carboniferous series in this district, we may assume that the coal-measures have an average thickness of 1000 or 1100 feet, and consist, at the utmost, of ninety distinct stralaf.
I endeavoured to obtain one or more shaft sections from every district in the field J ; in many parts, however, no accounts have been kept, and I have bad to depend upon the statements of the ground-bailiffs. From long practice, the memory of these superintendents is generally tenacious ; but as it is liable to error, I have affixed a note of interrogation to all such sec-
tions; and to those which have appeared to me as very doubtful, I have attached two or more notes of interrogation : I have, however, taken every possible pains to ascertain the correctness of the accounts given to me. In most of these sections, except those at Madeley and a few other works, the thin, bituminous shales in contact with the coal are included in the thickness of the
coal. At one pit, as already observed, several strata may be reckoned as one ; and at another pit, a stratum of sandstone may be subdivided into beds, according to the compactness of the different portions. When two beds of coal are separated by a layer of shale from only two to twelve inches, the layers are frequently omitted.
This fact will readily be seen by an inspection of the shaft sections (see Appendix). The discrepancy from this and other causes is sometimes so great, that were it not for the Penneystone, clod coal, best coal, and one or two more beds, which serve as landmarks throughout the whole field, it would be difficult to recognize the connexion between the Donnington district and the Ma
linslee, or between the Malinslee and the Madeley or the Broseley. The difference between the Amies and Donnington sections is still more striking, and placed side by side they appear totally distinct. (Diagram, PI. XXXVII.) It is singular to observe the great and rapid variations in the importance and lithological character of the larger portion of the strata composing these coal- measures. One stratum will gradually disappear, whilst a thin one will rapidly acquire a thickness of several feet, and will again frequently wedge out. In some places, as at Priorslee, the clod, middle, and best coals are separated by only a few inches of shale, and can consequently be worked as one seam, and in the same level; whilst at New Hadle}r, Broseley, and other localities, they are separated by 4 to 10 feet of shale or sandstone. The Chance Penney- stone, which is 8 feet thick at Woombridge, is unknow n at Malinslee. In the former district 23 feet of sandstone and shale are interposed between the “ white flat measure” and the “ flint coal,” whilst at Malinslee they are in immediate superposition : at the latter point there are 102 feet between the “ brick measures” and the “ double coal,” though at Woombridge only 36 feet. The following table exhibits the thickness in feet of the strata between the Penneystone measure and the clod coal, commencing north and proceeding south, about 8 miles.
A singular instance of rapid variation occurs at Ketley and Arleston, in the upper and lower clunches. At Woombridge and New Hadley the thickness of these strata is 20 feet, whereas near the Ketley furnaces it amounts to 126 feet, and at Arleston to 120 feet; but at Lawley it again decreases to 21 feet, and at Little Wenlock to 15 feet. Amidst all these indications of rapid changes, the persistence over large areas of the lower coal-beds, especially the clod coal, is remarkable. The upper coals are, as before stated, more irregular in thickness and extent, though far more constant in their range, than the other strata. In the old Park, an instance, however, occurred of a bed of coal six feet thick gradually thinning off, and extending through an area of only 300 yards by 40 yards.
It would be an almost impracticable task to enumerate all the changes exhibited in every part of the field; I have therefore attempted to form a diagram (PI. XXXVII.) which connects and dovetails the principal sections of the coal-field from Donnington to Caugbley ; and an inspection of it may convey a clearer idea of the structure of the coal formation than could be derived from a lengthened description. The vertical scale is necessarily much exaggerated in order to show each stratum, and to avoid too great an extension. The changes in lithological characters also are partially illustrated in the same diagram.
It may be mentioned that rapid changes in thickness and composition are generally concomitants. The upper and lower clunches of the northern and central districts pass, as they expand in their range southward, into hard shales, and eventually into sandstones, with a few subordinate beds of shale. The strata of sandstones, marls, clays, and shales, indeed rarely maintain the same appearance for a mile, and frequently differ considerably in the space of twenty yards. The shales are however far more constant in composition than the sandstones, which vary incessantly, passing from a fine-grained into a very coarse rock or into a more or less compact shale. For example, the best coal rock at the Meadow Madeley pits changes from a light buff-coloured sandstone into a hard dark gray shale. At Ketley, the sandstone overlying the Penneystone is of a bright ochreous colour, and at Broseley it is quite white. The curious phenomenon locally called “ Symon fault” is another instance in point. This apparent fault is occasioned by the gradual, but complete substitution of the coal by clay, shale, or sandstone. The coal is at first deteriorated by a slight admixture of one of these substances, the proportion of which rapidly increases, until it entirely replaces the coal. This phenomenon is of common occurrence in the neighbourhood of Broseley and Caughley, and occasionally at Madeley and Priorslee. The alteration in the coal varies in extent from ten to five hundred yards. At Langley, a sandy “ Symon fault” occurs in the Penneystone measure, when a great increase in the number and variety of the organic remains was observable. Another great change in lithological characters, and in the thickness of the strata, occurs between Lightmoor and Madeley. In all the series above the flint coal it is difficult to trace the connexion between the two districts. (See Diagram.) Notwithstanding these frequent changes, the coal-measures, as mentioned at the commencement of the chapter, preserve a certain general arrangement.
A very important example of this phenomenon is exhibited at Malinslee. The upper strata are the first affected, but the altered structure gradually pervades the whole of the measures, as they trend eastward. The change is apparently produced by an admixture of red and yellow clay, marl and sand, locally called ” Calaminker”. The upper coals and ironstones are replaced by beds of this character immediately east of Malinslee, the change in the flint coal shortly follows, then the gray and uniformly thick Penneystone stratum assumes the appearance of a mottled red shale, and finally the clod and lower coals vanish at Randley Wood, half a mile east of where the change commences in the upper strata. A somewhat similar and equally remarkable alteration occurs in the northern extremity of the field, commencing between Donnington and Munton. The upper strata there pass into thick irregular beds of concretionary red and light greenish conglomerate, containing a few very thin layers of coal, and some subordinate beds of shale. The deeper strata are however less affected, and at a trial pit sunk near Lilleshall Hall, the strata from the clod coal up to the top of the flint rock above the Penneystone, corresponded precisely with the undisturbed measures of Donnington, but all the coal and ironstone above that stratum had vanished. (See shaft section, Diagram, PI. XXXVII.).
Thesurfacesof some of the strata are furrowed and waved,and saddle-shaped ridges, two to four feet in height and several yards in length, sometimes exist on the surface of the shales underlying the coal-beds; but they gradually disappear in the overlying strata. In the sandstone, especially in the coarser beds, the under surface is in places very uneven, filling up hollows and grooves in the subjacent shale or coal, and resulting apparently from the abrading action of the water which deposited the sandstone. In the shale roof of some coals are occasionally found singular misshaped conical masses, which from their smooth surface fail out, to the annoyance of the workmen, as soon as the supporting coal is removed. They are traversed by divisional and slightly concave planes at right angles to their axes, but otherwise exhibit no external or internal structure. They are formed of the same substance as their matrix, from which they are sometimes separated by a thin parting of coal. The name given to them is ‘f pot-holes ” or ff hatter-blocks.” Their height is generally two or three feet, and the diameter at the base equals one-third or half of the height.
Shales, sometimes slightly micaceous, are not of frequent occurrence, but hard indurated clays are common, and often contain ironstone nodules. The argillaceous strata predominate in the north of the coal-field, and sandstones in the south. The latter are occasionally micaceous and fissile, and sometimes form thick-bedded freestones, but at other times are coarse-grained and conglomeratic. The imbedded pebbles almost invariably consist of milk-white quartz, but a few of a red colour are associated with them, and the matrix apparently consists of the same materials finely comminuted. Partings, filaments, and roundish lumps of coal, are common in the upper sandstones. Petroleum impregnates many of the central sandstones ; and saltwater pervades some of the sandstone strata. Dr. Townson says, “In the neighbourhood of this tar spring (at Madeley), several springs of salt-water have been found, but none of sufficient strength to be worth working. The water which exudes from the flint coal in some works in the parish of Madeley, is likewise salt; and in the adjoining parish of Broseley, there was formerly a salt-work, where salt is said to have been made from water taken out of the coal-pits.”
Nos. 34. and 51. in the section of the Hill’s Lane pits, are beds of an impure calcareous conglomerate; but as they are nowhere exposed, and were only to be judged of by hand-specimens, I could not ascertain whether any fossils existed in them.
A gray and brownish very hard limestone, with a conchoidal fracture, and varying from one to two yards in thickness, crops out atTasley near Bridgenorth. The lime made from it, is in general applicable to agricultural purposes only, but in some cases it is well adapted for a water cement. At the Amies it apparently consists of fragments of a gray limestone imbedded in a whitish calcareous paste. This bed of limestone was first noticed by Mr. Murchison in a memoir read before this Society in 1834, and shown by him from its organic remains to be of freshwater origin. He has detected the band, at intervals, along a devious outline extending to the edge of the Bred- din Hills, but always in the same geological horizon. It is but lately, that I have been enabled to ascertain its true position in the Coalbrook Dale field, as it had hitherto been explored at its outcrop only, where but a few feet of clay or marl overlie it.
In September 1836, I found at the mouth of a pit, then sinking between the Amies and the Tuckiss, a considerable quantity of the same limestonef. The bed was about 4 feet thick, 90 yards from the surface, and 10 yards above a sulphur coal, about 125 feet above the clod coal, or only 170 feet from the base of the formation ; but this part of the field being apparently of littoral formation, the connexion of the strata between this locality and those where marine remains occurj is not yet clearly ascertained, for I have been unable distinctly to detect this band of limestone on the north of the Severn. Nevertheless, by tracing the prolongation of the bed by means of a few of the associated strata, its equivalent in other parts of the coal-field may be approximated to. Accordingly, at New Hadley and Woombridge, the place which this freshwater stratum should hold may be somewhere about that occupied by the marine deposit of Chance Penneystone.
A few of the thicker lower sandstones are extensively quarried for building materials; the principal so employed being those above the little flint coal, the Penneystone, the flint coal, and ball-stone. The first makes the best hearthstones for the iron furnaces. The beds of clay are numerous and valuable. The Shropshire fire-clay vies with that of Stourbridge; and its bricks are sent to all parts of the kingdom. Many of the “ Pounstones ” form good fire bricks. A peculiar difference marks two of the ironstone shales. The shale in which the Penneystone is imbedded, is extremely injurious to vegetation,, its mounds remaining for years without a blade of grass ; whereas the shale of the ballstone forms a very productive soil,, and is used as a manure.
In the former marine, and in the latter, only vegetable remains are found.
For further explanation of the mineralogical characters of the different strata, I must refer to the explanatory sections of Woombridge pit (Appendix A.) by Dr. Townson, and that of the Hill’s Lane pits, Madeley, by myself.
In the upper measures, the coal seams are usually thin, distant and irregular in their deposition ; whereas, in the lower, they are thick and persistent over the whole field. The average thickness of the principal coal-beds is about 3 feet; and the number of the seams varies from 7 to 22. The following table exhibits the total thickness and number of the coal-beds at each place
respectively.
In these localities the productive coal-measures are fully developed, and consequently the difference of total thickness does not arise from the cropping out at one place of beds which exist at another. The Madeley sections have been so carefully made, that the thinnest layer has been recorded, which is not the case elsewhere. Hence the great difference in the number of the beds. We see from the above table, that the number, and especially the total thickness of the coal seams, decreases to the south. The same phenomenon also occurs, as will presently be shown, in the ironstone measures.
The coals of this district are generally of the variety called slate coal. Some of the upper seams, especially the fungous coal, contain a large proportion of mineral charcoal. Foliated coal forms several of the thin upper seams, and particularly the sulphur coal, underlying the Penney-stone. This coal often breaks into very regular cubical fragments, and has a brilliant lustre. Cannel coal is of rare occurrence. At Madeley several tons of it were found in the middle of the flint coal, forming a layer 8 inches thick, which gradually thinned out.
Many of the coals contain so much sulphuret of iron, that they can be used only for making lime, as the “sulphur coal” below the Penneystone, which is, in other respects, a fine seam. These pyritous beds are called sulphur or stinking coals, and are distinguished by the lustre and sharpness of their fracture, their greater specific gravity, and by their unpleasant odour while burning.
Sometimes iron pyrites forms layers three or four inches thick; at other times it is mixed with coal in minute, invisible particles. The presence of this mineral renders the coal unfit for the reducing of the ironstone. At Kingslow, the “ sulphur coal”, which contains much black and brown mineral charcoal, is often beautifully iridescent.
Vegetable impressions may occasionally be detected in some of the coals; and I have a specimen of the “best coal” which exhibits a very sharp and distinct impression of a portion of a palm-leaf. Imperfect remains of vegetables, in the state of charcoal, are not uncommon, especially in the “ fungous coal”, of which they sometimes constitute the larger portion.
The “ clod coal” is the best in the district, both for general use and for the iron furnaces. The “ middle and best, or Randle coals”, which almost immediately overlie it, are also good coals, but are rarely fit for the manufacture of iron. The “fungous coal”, which is confined to the north of the field, is also excellent for every purpose. The “ top and double coals” are equally valuable. The “ flint coal ” is good and serviceable, but cannot be used in the iron furnaces; neither can the “ little flint coal”, which is much worked in the southern districts, but it is not equally good in the north of the coal-field f. All the coals have a distinct line of cleavage, at right angles to which the miners always proceed when possible. These joints are vertical to the lamination, and are invariably W.N.W. and E.S.E. An imperfect set of joints runs at right angles to this system. Sometimes, however, as in the “ sulphur coal” at Ketley Bank, both are equally developed.
Iron is abundantly diffused throughout the whole of the coal-measures, but it prevails in some strata more than in others. Almost all the sandstones are tinged, spotted, or striped by the peroxide of iron, which hardens the rock; and consequently, when its surface is exposed to the atmosphere, these ferruginous patches stand out in relief.
In the shale beds, in which it occurs in the greatest abundance, it consists of argillaceous carbonate of iron, in flattish nodules, of variable size, form, and specific gravity. All the workable ores are procured from these beds, with the exception of the “ Crawstone”, or lowest measure, which forms irregular large masses in a finely-grained sandstone. This measure is of much better quality in the southern than in the northern division of the coal-field.
Proceeding upwards the “ Penneystone” nodules are generally small, flat, and smooth; but they increase in size and number as they approach the top of the stratum, where they not unfrequently form a capping of solid layers.
The “white flats” are in a hard shale, and consist of small, light-coloured, and rather rough nodules.
* I have made a proximate analysis of the principal coals of Coalbrook Dale, and found that 100 parts of coal consist of the following component parts :
f See Dr. Townson’s Descriptions.

The “ blue flat” is a large, misshapen, very fossiliferous ironstone, imbedded in a very dark bluish shale.
The “ chancestone” is an irregular, thickish layer, capping the yard-coal, to which it adhere It is of local occurrence.—See New Hadley.
The “ yellowstone,” so called from its external colour, consists of small, very rough, and lumpy nodules, frequently with a conchoidal fracture.
The “ hailstones ” generally form two or three layers of large, smooth nodules, imbedded in a light-coloured shale. It is not known by this name south of Ketley.
The “ brickman’s measure” consists of two or three layers of ironstone, which break into nearly regular parallelopipeds resembling bricks.
The “ blackstone” is composed of small and lumpy nodules, with a black, shining coating, and a characteristic conchoidal fracture. They are imbedded in a tough, dark clay, and are not known south of Malinslee.
The “ Ragged Robins” is a very irregular ore, and is occasionally found in the argillaceous sandstone underlying the fungous coal, as at Ketley and New Hadley.
The nodules of “ Chance Penneystone” are small, but smooth and numerous, and are also not known south of New Hadley.
The above are the beds usually worked in different parts of the coal-field, the higher measures having a very limited range.
The following tables will show that the number and thickness of the workable measures are much greater in the northern than in the southern part of the field.
These calculations were made from data obtained in Woombridge, and are consequently not applicable to other parts of the coal-field. In addition to these regular measures large nodules of ironstone are disseminated through various parts of the strata. The ironstone of the clod coal passes sometimes into a thin layer of solid ironstone. Some of the shales of the lower series, especially the bituminous shale overlying the little-flint coal in Broseley arid Caughley parishes, contain occasionally very large septariated nodules of ironstone, often 6 or 7 feet in diameter and 1 to 2 feet thick. A singular conglomerate of ironstone caps the Penneystone measure at Made- ley and Lightmoor, and now and then in other localities. It forms a layer from an inch to a foot thick, consisting of numerous small grains of milk-white quartz and a few small rolled pebbles of ironstone and traces of trap rocks, imbedded in a matrix of ironstone.
At Woombridge and in its neighbourhood, nodules, from 1 to 4 feet in diameter and 1 to 2 thick, of calcareous ironstone, inclosing curlstone, form the upper layer of the Penneystone measure. Upon breaking the nodules, the apices of the cones of curlstone are found generally attached to the upper and lower surfaces of the crust of the nodule, whilst the bases of the cone face and nearly touch each other. Some portions of the curlstone when calcined, form excellent red ochre.
The composition of the ironstones varies, but the average produce is about 33 per cent. Two or more different ores are generally smelted together. According to Mr. Anstice, the following is the average proportion of fuel, flux, and ore, necessary to make one ton of pig iron : Coal, 4 tons ; limestone, 1 ton ; raw ironstone, 3 tons. The loss of weight by calcination is about 25 per cent.
For an account of the extraneous minerals found in the ironstone nodules, see Appendix B.
The following average specific gravities of the principal ironstones, I have deduced from several
experiments. The well-known tar spring at Coalport, which had its rise in one of the thick sandstones of the central series, formerly yielded nearly 1000 gallons a week; but it now produces only a few'gallons in the same time. In sinking a shaft at Priorslee, the 20-yard rock was so charged with petroleum, that the shaft was converted into a tar well. The mineral is drawn up in a bucket, and kept in large cisterns ; but the supply has much decreased. In Tarbet’s Dingle is a spring of water, upon the surface of which floats a small quantity of petroleum. It formerly yielded two or three gallons a day. In a pit at the top of the same dingle, petroleum exuded in so great abundance from every crevice in the “ little coal,” and from the shale forming the roof, that the colliers were obliged, in the latter case, to have large plates of iron suspended over them. This inconvenience was, however, of no great extent. Similar cases have occurred in working the flint coal in some of the Dawley pits. In the roofs of the clod and best coal, I have frequently seen it in smaller quantities. More rarely, petroleum is found in cavities in the Penneystone nodules.
Carburetted hydrogen gas is evolved in larger quantities in the deep-seated coals, and in less abundance in those which are nearer the surface, and, consequently, the deep works at Dawley, Malinslee, Priorslee, &c., suffer much more from this gas than the works at Lawley, Ketley Hill, &c.* In the first-mentioned districts the disengagement of the gas from the pores and fissures in the clod, best and sill coals, especially at the commencement of a new work, is considerable, but still much less than is given off under similar circumstances in the Newcastle and some other coal fields. In walking along the wall of the coal, the gas maybe constantly felt issuing from the small crevices. It is worthy of remark, that the evolution of the gas always greatly increases upon approaching the Lightmoor and other large faults; near which masses of coal are frequently blown off the bed, with loud detonations. Now, may not this larger accumulation of gas in the vicinity of the faults be owing to the powerful action which accompanied their formation ?
To account for the enormous quantity of gas evolved in the Newcastle coal-field, Mr. William Hutton made a series of interesting microscopic investigations, and ascertained that the coal contained numerous small cells, in which he supposes the gas was originally confined in a fluid state ; and that when the great superincumbent pressure is decreased in the progress of the works, the elasticity of the fluid immediately causes it to assume its gaseous form—the great and sudden expansion being accompanied with loud detonations.
Carbonic acid gas is more rarely met with, and chiefly in the old workings. Near the roof of a small excavation in a pit at Caughley is a narrow opening, through which a stream constantly flows, and descends to the floor, where it forms a stratum from eight to twelve inches thick, the ventilation of the pit preventing its further accumulation; but a small shaft in the same chamber is completely filled with it. This great supply is probably derived from some of the neighbouring old works,—the gas passing through fissures in the rocks. Carbonic acid is seldom present in any quantity during the working of a pit; but in many, when abandoned, the atmospheric air is soon expelled by it.
Note.
Coalbrook Dale has been long celebrated for its iron-works, which once produced the best iron in England; but it is not known at what period the manufactory of this metal was there commenced. From the extent of the outcrops of the Crawstone and Penneystone ironstone measures, and of the little flint, clod, best, sill, sulphur, and big-flint coals, no portion of the country could offer greater facilities for procuring an easy and large supply of ore, flux, and fuel. In many parts of the coal-field, where the necessary materials are now exhausted, are large heaps of slags and cinders, for which even tradition does not assign an origin.
To the escape of this gas, from one of the deep-seated coals, through some small crack in the superincumbent strata, no doubt is to be attributed the phenomenon of the celebrated burning well at Broseley, discovered in the beginning of the last century, and destroyed by the sinking of an adjoining coal pit in 1755.
A few years since were found in a coal pit, 80 yards deep, and on the banks of the Severn, Camden states, that before his time, coal and iron were worked at the Oaken Gates. As this place, the Usocona of the Romans, is situated at the foot of a hill, upon the sides of which the Penneystone measure and the flint coal crop out, it is very probable, that these minerals were worked during the occupation of Britain by the Romans, who had also another important station at Uriconium, now Wroxeter, opposite to that on which the Oaken Gates are situated.
It is certain however that, of late years, the collieries have been so industriously and generally worked, that almost all the best seams, both of coal and iron, to the west of the Lightmoor fault, and south of Ketley, are nearly exhausted. To the south of the Severn, in the vicinity of Broseley, there were formerly eight or nine furnaces; but they are now all blown out, for want, principally, of the proper description of fuel. A valuable supply of coal and ironstone, however, yet remains in the districts east of the Lightmoor fault, and at Donnington. Still, from the limited extent of the coal-field, as now known, and from the great activity with which it is worked, it appears probable, that the materials for the manufacture of iron will be exhausted in a very few generations. The iron masters must then continue their works under the new red sandstone, beneath which it is to be hoped that they will find, although at a great depth, a new and abundant supply.
Organic Remains of the Coal-Measures. 
The paper on the Ganister Coal Series in Yorkshire, by Mr. J. Phillips, contains an interesting account of numerous marine remains found in those coal-measures. While reading that paper, I was struck with the analogy between the Yorkshire field and that of Coalbrook Dale, similar alternation of beds containing marine and fresh-water exuviae occurring in both localities. These phenomena are supposed by Mr. Phillips " to indicate a periodical return of the marine element into its ancient receptacle, after it had been for some time occupied by fresh water, and its few inhabitants.” I am inclined, however, to consider, that the measures of the Coalbrook Dale field were deposited in an estuary, into which flowed a great river ; that the latter, during periods of tranquillity, carried down the silt forming the present beds of shale, enclosing,at the same time, the marine inhabitants of the estuary; and that during floods, the river drifted along vast quantities of uprooted plants several implements used in mining, evidently of considerable antiquity; they were all constructed very rudely of wood, merely edged or bound with sheet iron.

This subject will be discussed more fully in the conclusion ; and 1 proceed to a particular account of the zoological and botanical reliquiae of the different beds. 
To this succeeds thin beds of sandstone and shale; and in one of the latter occurs, at Wimsey Styches and Caughley pits, Madeley parish, the “ new mine ironstone,” which contains a very few vegetable remains and Unios.
A few yards higher is a series of sandstone strata, characterised by numerous casts and impressions of the Stigmaria Jicoides; and it also contains Calamites and Sigillarise. About the centre of these strata is a bed of whitish sandstone, with ironstone, called “ the Crawstone,” which abounds with the remains of the Stigmaria Jicoides, some ten inches in diameter; and, occasionally, with casts of Unios, remarkable for their preservation and smooth surface*. Many of the Stigmaria found at New Lawley, exhibit the central pith-tube structure beautifully preserved. It was in a specimen from this locality that the singular anatomy of the plant was detected by Professor Lindley.
A few feet above the crawstone is the little-flint coal, the only seam which in any part of the coal-field occurs between two strata of sandstone. A singular phenomenon is frequently presented by this bed. Having been informed that at Madeley, Broseley, and elsewhere, the coal is occasionally so pebbly that it cannot be used, I inspected the bed, and I found that it was traversed horizontally in all parts by small flattened tubes of white sandstone, proceeding from stems of the Stigmaria Jicoides, and imbedded in the coal. The length of these bodies, or casts of leaves, I could not ascertain; but it was evident, from the condition of the stem and from the leaves being generally attached, that the plant could not have been much disturbed from its original position. The stems are generally horizontal, or gently inclined, and slightly flattened ; and the leaves, which proceed from them at right angles, or nearly so, are very little compressed between the laminae of the coal. The sandstone, which has replaced the stem, bark, and leaves, is finely grained, and remarkably white. How to account for its infiltration into the body of plants placed in a thick seam of coal offers an interesting inquiry J. In the roof of the coal, impressions of Stigmaria Jicoides are common, with a few Calamites.
To this coal succeed thick sandstones, with a few similar vegetable casts and impressions.
In the thin beds of shale and clay separating the clod, randle, sill, and best coals, which overlie the thick sandstones, the multitude of vegetable impressions is very surprising. They lie horizontally, and in all directions. Amongst them are Poacites, Calamites, Lepidodendra, Sigillariae, and a few Stigmaria; but the characteristics are Sphenopteris, Neuropteris, and Sigillarise, some of the last being 25 feet long and 5 feet broad. I procured in these beds only one imperfect cast of an univalve, resembling the Bellerophon found in the Penneystone.
In the sandstone and shale above the best coal at the Birch leasow pits, Broseley, casts and impressions of vegetables are so numerous as to divide the sandstone into thin laminae, which are easily separated. At Blissers’ Hill pit, Madeley, and at the Holywell pits, Malinslee, I also saw some very large casts, the terminations of which I could in no instance discover. Upon several of the impressions of the delicate Sphenopteris imbedded in the rock above the best coal at Broseley, the vegetable tissue of the leaves is preserved, and presents a thin, brown, semi-transparent, and elastic filament*. Mr. J. Phillips has shown me vegetable remains in the same state from the oolitic series in Yorkshire. Similar fossils, but in less abundance, characterise the strata up to the Penneystone.
The organic remains contained in this bed of ironstone, are tolerably numerousf and well preserved ; and are of the greatest geological importance, as marine animal remains largely preponderate. Fragments of a few stems of plants, from two to three inches long and from half an inch to an inch in diameter, are the only vegetable reliquiae found in this stratum. The external characters are entirely destroyed, but the cellular texture and the fibres are preserved in the state of soft brown lignite. These remains are often studded with beautiful crystals of blende and carbonate of lime, and are enclosed in the nodules of ironstone.
The characteristic marine fossil is the Leptccna (Producta) scabricula, which is abundant, and is well known as a mountain limestone fossil; the Spirifer bisulcatus likewise occurs frequently. Several species of Nautilus, Bellerophon, Conularia, Pecten, Orbicula, Unio, Terebratula, Nucula, Globulus, Lingula, and other shells (Appendix C.), associated with scales and bones of the Megalichlhys Hihberti, and the Gyracanthus formosus; likewise remains of Crustacea, new species of Trilobites, and Crinoidea and Coprolites. In the centre of almost every ironstone nodule at Broseley is a dark-coloured, irregularly-shaped spot, which rarely exhibits any traces of organization; but the careful examination of an extensive suite of the nodules shows, that the greater number of these remains are referable to Conulariae, a few to Coprolites, and a less number to the animal matter of the Orbicula. Conulariae abound in this part of the coal-field, though not so plentifully as at Madeley, and are more rarely found at Hadley, Woombridge, and Don- nington. They vary from a quarter of an inch to tw’o inches in length, and the breadth at the larger end is about a quarter of the length. In none of the numerous specimens which I have examined, could I find any traces of a septum. In two, however, I discovered an apparently osseous structure ; white carbonate of lime having infiltrated into the pores, whilst the organic matter remains nearly unaltered, but of a dark brown or black colour. Mr. J. De Carl Sow- erby also pointed out to me a singular character. The striae of some specimens are notched by a set of transverse small furrows, whilst in others the striae are perfectly smooth. This difference in structure he found in examining an ironstone specimen, to arise from the presence or absence of a thin, dark-brown skin or covering, of which the interior striae are smooth, and the exterior denticulated or notched (see Plate XL.). The dark spots in the ironstone are not always confined to the size of the Conulariae, but are frequently larger, and when such specimens can be separated from the matrix, they are generally found to consist of an oval body, without any traces of external markings, the larger axis being traversed by a Conularia, the apex of which sometimes slightly protrudes. Whether this body be part of the Conularia, I cannot decide ; but its black colour indicates animal matter. Another characteristic fossil of the Penneystone measure is the Orbicula reflexa, of which several specimens are frequently found in one nodule. The exterior of the shell, which is either black or speckled white and brown, generally retains its beautiful lustre, but the organic matter is almost entirely replaced by the substance of the matrix—except in a very few instances, where a fine white, very delicately striated shell remains. Several species of Unio, often of a large size, occur in the measure. The Bellerophon is rare, except at Langley, where some of the large thin flakes of the ironstone are full of them. Nautili are common; but univalves are rare, (see Appendix, list of organic remains). Mr. Anstice has lately obtained portions of a column of Cyathocrinites quinquangularis in a Penneystone nodule at Madeley. The fragments in the centre of the nodule consist entirely of the substance of the matrix; but although no organic matter remains, the surface of the encrinal column and its plates exhibit a vitreous lustre similar to that of the facets of crystals, and like them, separating easily in the direction of the natural surfaces. When the fossil occurs upon the outside of the stone, no such appearance is exhibited. At the Horsehay pits, I have since found numerous specimens of the same Cyathocrinites ; but in this case, the organic matter is replaced by light yellow, earthy carbonate of iron. The presence of sauroid fishes in this depositis of considerable interest. The remains of these animals have been long noticed in the coal-measures, but it is to the recent labours of Dr. Hibbert-Ware* and M. Agassiz t that we are indebted for the determination of their nature.
In the first volume of the Zoological Journal, Mr. Sowerby figured and briefly described the ray of the Gyracanthus formosus; but he confessed that he was unable to refer it to any known genus. This specimen was from the Newcastle coal-field ; and in the Museum of that town, Mr. Hutton showed me several similar rays. Mr. Anstice has had fossils of the same nature in his collection for many years. Dr. Hibbert-Ware in his able memoir says, “ the limestone of Burdiehouse entombs thorny rays of immense magnitude, and most beautifully configurated, which it is impossible to contemplate without amazement. M. Agassiz proposes to name the fish to which these rays belong, the Gyracanthus formosus.” In the shale of the Penneystone, but also upon the exterior of the ironstone nodules, are occasionally found the angular scales of that remarkable sauroid fish the Mcgalichthys Hibberti. The scales differ slightly from those which I have seen at Burdiehouse, their lustre externally being greater, and their colour much darker. Dr. Hibbert- Ware states that “ one description of scales (of the Megal'ichthys) exhibits a coating of enamel of a nut-brown colour, and often of the most brilliant lustre imaginable. These scales are of various forms, though generally angular. A most curious character is the punctured surface which many of them display, a character which I have traced, though in a less prevalent degree, in the scales of the recent crocodile.” Some of the large plates of the head are found at Madeley in a perfect state, and are mottled dark brownish grey, (see Plate XLI., fig. 10, 11.); the scales of the body are rarely in position, but I have met with one specimen in which several of them were continuous. This specimen also exhibits a few of the vertebrae, which are about three-quarters of an inch in diameter, and concave on both sides ; the last-mentioned remains are very scarce.

An interesting phenomenon in the distribution of the animal reliquiae in the Penneystone measure is observable at Langley. I had collected from other localities during three summers, a large number ofLeptaenae, Spirifers, Orbiculae, Conulariae, and Nautili; and Mr. Anstice had found one specimen of a Cyathocrinites and a few scales of the Megalichthys and Gyracanthus, but in the deep works at Langley, the Penneystone measure, which is usually very regular in its character, was in one place much changed by an admixture of sand, and the ironstone nodules became lumpy, less numerous, and bad ; and were accompanied by a remarkable increase in the number and variety of the organic remains ; including all the before-mentioned species, together with species of Bellerophon, Nautilus, Nucula, Lingula, Crinoidea, &c. Unfortunately, the quality of the ironstone was so much deteriorated, that that part of the work was soon abandoned. A singular diminution, and, finally, a total absence of fossils, occurs in this stratum in its range northward. (See Diagram, PI. XXXVII.)
Above the Penneystone, south of Lightmore, no marine remains have been found.
The Penney-ironstone measure is immediately succeeded by a stratum of a fine-grained sandstone, generally ferruginous, and varying from 5 to 10 yards in thickness ; but the fossils, unlike those of the subjacent bed, consist of a most luxuriant land vegetation, including numerous species of Calamites, Sigillaria, Lepidodendron, and Stigmaria. These remains are most frequently found in the partings of the rock, and generally lie horizontally, but in all directions. As usual, the cast is formed of the substance of the matrix, and it rarely, if ever, possesses any traces of vegetable texture ; but the exterior bark is frequently replaced by a thin coating of fine coal. Calamites of several species constitute the prevailing fossils; and they are generally from half an inch to 4 inches in diameter and from 1 foot to 10 feet in length ; yet owing to their extreme brittleness when first exposed, they are difficult to preserve entire. Sigillariae are also common, some of them being of a very large size. One fine specimen, in a quarry near Ketley, measured 10 feet in circumference. It was truncated at the parting of the strata about a foot above the root, which consisted of four tapering prolongations, each about 4 feet long. The markings on the surface were nearly obliterated, and the species consequently could not be determined. Specimens of this size, I have always found similarly placed, and universally truncated. They may be observed in the “ cow wood” and other quarries of that district, in the sandstones of the “ clod coal poundstone ” at Castle Green, and in the same measures in the Blisses Hill pits at Madeley. Imperfect impressions of the leaflets of Stigmariae and Lepidodendra can generally be traced. A few varieties of dicotyledonous wood also occur.
Immediately upon this sandstone reposes the flint coal, in which vegetable impressions are not uncommon. In a pit at Dawley, I found a large upright stem in a similar condition to that of the fossil tree of Cragleith. Its diameter was 1 foot and its height 3 feet; and it was truncated at both ends. The bark, which was replaced by coal, about a quarter of an inch thick, exhibited no distinct marking. The internal structure was that of coniferous wood, somewhat resembling the Pinites Withami.
In the hard bituminous shale which in some parts of the field overlies the flint coal, are several bands full ol a crushed bivalve shell, and belonging apparently to the genus Unio; scales of a Hybodus ? and other fishes occur, though rarely.
To this generally succeeds a bed of hard micaceous shale containing a layer of ironstone nodules, called the white flats, in which are imbedded some very interesting fossils. The characteristic plants are Lycopodiaceae and Equisetaceae ; but associated with them are considerable quantities of two or three species of Unio. Scales and bones of Megalichthys Hibbertii, and Gyracanthus formosus, are occasionally met with ; but the most singular and interesting fossils in this stratum are several undescribed Crustacea of the Trilobite family.

A few feet above the “ White flat”, in the northern division, is the “ Blue flat” ironstone. The large, mis-shapen nodules of this measure are full of casts of Unios, and vegetable impressions of the order Lycopodiaceae, well preserved but in great confusion.
A thin seam of clay separates that ironstone from the “ yard-coal ”, upon which reposes the “yellow flat” ironstone, containing a few Unios, and several species of Sigillaria, Calamites, and many genera of Lycopodiaceae.
The strata, between that bed and the “ Top coal,” contain organic remains analogous to those of the last three or four beds. The bass above the “Top coal” contains, in Donnington, remains of the Megalichthys, Gyracanthus, and other fishes, with a few Unios. It is only in the north of the coal-field that the ballstone measure is known; the nodules of which are large, and the bed is remarkable for the abundance and beauty of its vegetable reliquiae. The Cyclopteris orbicularis, and several other species of the same genus characterize this deposit. They are always beautifully preserved, every fibre being perfect; and the thin, delicate tissue of the plant is indicated by the sharp and unbroken, though crumpled state of the leaf. This bed is also distinguished by the presence of Lycopodiaceae, Asterophyllites, and Bechera. I discovered no animal remains in it. It is remarkable that, although the vegetable impressions are so abundant in the ironstone nodules, yet none are found in the shale in which the ironstone is imbedded. This is also the case, in a great degree, with all the fossils of the other ironstone strata.
The thick bed of sandstone which overlies the “ballstone ” at Ketley contains only a few vegetable remains, the most common being casts of Calamites.
For several yards above this sandstone, the strata inclose very few fossils, and they are chiefly vegetable.
The “ Brick measure ironstone” is as much characterized by the paucity of organic remains, as the other ironstones are by their abundance. I found only three small and imperfect impressions of monocotyledonous plants.
Ten or twelve yards higher is the “ Blackstone” measure. This ironstone contains a few casts of Unios and Lycopodiaceae; and I have found a few specimens of Orbicula reflexa in the dark shale of this stratum ; and, latterly, in Donnington Wood, some beautifully preserved small Lingulae, together with remains of fishes.
I am not aware that the strata between the “ Blackstone” and “ Chance Penneystone” are characterized by any particular fossils. The few which are met with, are imperfect impressions of Ferns, and other plants.
The “ Chance Penneystone,” which is the highest bed of ironstone in the coal-field, is a deposit of considerable interest. After the great preponderance of vegetables and Unios in the strata, between the Main Penneystone and this, we suddenly arrive at a deposit containing, in great abundance, Leptcena scabricula, a fossil found only in the two Penney ironstones in this coal-field. In some places it occurs in great abundance, one or more of these shells having served as a nucleus for almost every nodule of ironstone, to the exclusion of any other fossil which I could discover. This stratum is also characterised by the presence of the Hybodus, Megalichthys Hibberti, Gyracanthus formosus, and Conulariae, presenting a remarkable analogy to the Penneystone as existing further southward, and which is 200 feet lower in the series. So great is the resemblance, both in organic remains and lithological character, that it would be almost impossible for any observer to distinguish between the two strata by an examination of the heaps at the pit’s mouth; but the Chance Penneystone is not persistent; and I am not aware of its existence further to the south than New Hadley and part of Ketley. As it disappears, the Penneystone becomes richer in organic remains.
To the “ Chance Penneystone ” succeed several thick strata of sandstone, with a few subordinate beds of shale, and traces of coal; but they are almost totally destitute of organic remains. In the Lower New Red Sandstone, into which the coal-measures apparently pass, I have met with a few imperfect impressions of soft monocotyledonous plants.
I have not noticed the fresh-water limestone in the foregoing series, as in the northern districts which afforded the principal materials for the previous observations, this calcareous band has not been found.
In it have been discovered the Microconckus carbonarius, a species of Cyclas, with the Cypris inflata.
Having now enumerated the characteristic organic remains of each bed, it remains to notice only those fossils, the proper place of which in the series is not correctly known. In the collection of Mr. Anstice are two remarkably interesting and singular fossils, called by Dr. Buckland Curculloides Ansticii and Curculloides Prestvicii. They are the oldest known insects. In the first part of this paper, read before the Society in 1834, I mentioned these fossils, but was unable to state to what genus they belonged. Mr. Manteli says that he has discovered in an ironstone nodule from Coalbrook Dale, the wing of a Neuropterous insect, closely resembling that of the living Corydalis of Carolinaf.
The specimen of Triconocarpum ovatum figured in the Fossil Flora of Great Britain (Plate CXLII. fig. A.), is also from the Coalbrook coal-field, and is in the collection of Mr. Anstice. It is supposed by Messrs. Lindley and Hutton to have been the fruit of a palm, as recent palms have a three-ribbed thick shell, containing a single seed.
From the length of time since the above fossils were found, the stratum in which they were procured, cannot be ascertained. It was most probably the Ballstone, or the White Flats.
With regard to the habitats, and state of preservation of the fossils, it may be repeated, that the ironstone nodules form the principal depositories both for the animal and vegetable remains, which generally present very sharp and distinct impressions and casts, almost always perfectly free from their original substance. In the shales in which the ironstones are imbedded, I have scarcely found a single vegetable impression. A few fish-scales, shells, and teeth, are sometimes, though rarely, met with in the Penneystone, Top coal, and Black- stone shales ; and some of the thin bands of crushed Unios exist in dark bituminous shales. The casts of Lycopodiaceae and testacea are often filled with crystallized sulphuret of zinc, and sometimes with carbonate of iron, and carbonate of lime. But one of the most common accompaniments of the casts of animal exuviae, is a white, impalpable powder, in which I have detected silica, alumina, and potash; thus agreeing with the mineral found by M. Guellemin in the mines of Antin, and termed by him P/iolenite. The shells of the Penneystone measure are almost always ironstone casts ; those belonging to the bivalves being generally external, but sometimes internal; and the muscular attachment is frequently marked by a black spot. Some of the larger shells are found in the shale, but the majority are imbedded in the ironstone nodules. In most of the shales and indurated clays in immediate contact with the coal, vegetable impressions are common, and they occur, though more rarely, in the body of the same strata. It has been already observed, that, in some rare instances, traces of the original vegetable tissue remain. In one of the black bituminous shales, associated with the yard-coal, are found impressions of Ferns, marked by a thin, bright coating of iron pyrites. The fossil plants in the sandstone strata are almost invariably casts in the matrix, the bark being frequently converted into coal. The principal specimens which retain the internal organization belong to Stigmariaficoides, and were found in the Crawstone; the stem of a large coniferous tree was also found in the flint-coal. The former of these fossils is figured and described in theFossil Flora (Plate 166. fig. 1 and 2.).
The distribution of the organic remains is extremely irregular in different parts of the coal-field; but the fossils of the lower series, like the strata themselves, are persistent throughout a much greater area than those of the upper. Thus, the Stigmaria ficoides and the Neuroptera gigantea are found as abundantly at Broseley as at Hadley. The Penneystone measure has been shown to be characterized, at different localities, by the preponderance of peculiar fossils. The sandstone above this measure contains but few plants at Broseley, and they are principally Stigmariae; whilst at Ketley, Calamites, Sigillariae, and Lepidodeudra, are abundant. The gregarious nature of the Trilobite family is evinced by their congregating within very small limits, for they have been found only in the White Flat, at one pit in Ketley, except a species of Asaphus, which exists in the Penneystone.
The numberless Unios which characterize the centre of the coal-measures at the Horsehays, Malinslee, Ketley, Woombridge, &c., are rarely met with at Broseley and Madeley. The ballstone, with its numerous and beautiful vegetable fossils, is not known much further south than Ketley; and the Chance Penneystone, so full of the Leptana scabriciila, is entirely confined to the northern districts of the coal-field ; whilst the Microconchus carbonarius and Cypris inflata have not been detected to the north of the Severn.
NEW RED SANDSTONE.
This important and extensive formation wraps around the two longer sides of the acute-angled triangle in which the foregoing series are developed ; its disjointed edges abutting, as already mentioned, against those of the several older deposits.
Mr. Murchison has shown, that the new red system, in its range through Cheshire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, and Worcestershire, consists of the following divisions; only the three lower of which occur in the immediate neighbourhood of Coalbrook Dale.
Foreign Appellations.
 Red and Green Marls	Keuper and Marnes irisees.
 Sandstones and Conglomerates	Bunter Sandstein and Gres bigarre.
Calcareous conglomerates	Zechstein and Calcaire magnesien.
Lower Red Sandstone	Rothe Todte Liegende.
At Rowton Farm, near Caughley, are exhibited alternating strata of gray, mottled, liver-coloured shales and marls, of a dark red tenacious clay, and of coarse dark-brick red, and light gray, micaceous sandstones, sometimes finely conglomeratic, belonging to the lower red sandstone (No. 4.). Owing to the numerous faults which surround and cut off the coal-measures, the relation of that formation to the new red sandstone cannot be satisfactorily ascertained. The dip of the two formations generally appears to be in the same direction ; and, in the south of the field, the lithological characters of the upper strata of the coal-measures so closely resemble those of some of the lower beds of the new red sandstone, that the latter might, in many cases, be mistaken for coal-measures. Imperfect impressions of the leaves of soft, monocotyle- donous plants occur, though rarely, in some of the sandstone beds. The characters, here exhibited by this portion of the red sandstone, offer the greatest analogies to those of the lowest beds of the deposit in the north of England, as described by Professor Sedgwick, in his able memoir on the Magnesian Limestone.
Upon this lowest division repose thick strata of characteristic brick-red and yellowish sandstones, with a few subordinate beds of calcareous conglomerate (No. 3.), composed of angular and slightly rounded fragments of limestone, which contain characteristic fossils of the mountain limestone, and are imbedded in a red, arenaceous cement. These equivalents of the dolomitic conglomerate are rarely visible.
In Apley Park, and in a field between the Windmill and Homer Farms, they were formerly quarried ; and it is probable that a thin, irregular zone of them may range parallel to the eastern boundary of the coal-measures; but, owing to the abundance of limestone at Lilleshall and Steeraways, the conglomerate is not sought after. At Homer Farm, the sandstones of this division are brought very near to the coal-measures, and along the line of the boundary fault, they appear, in many places, to be in immediate contact with the carboniferous and trap rocks.
To this division succeeds a considerable thickness of bright red sandstones, mottled marls, and coarse conglomerates (No. 2.), which are interesting, as they afford a due to the strata, the detritus of which has served to form the deposit. In a quarry about half a mile W.N.W. of Shiffnall, I found rolled fragments of the following rocks imbedded in a red, finely brecciated mass of the same materials.
White and red quartz ;
Igneous rocks, similar to those constituting the Wrekin and Lilleshall hills; Carboniferous limestone, resembling that of the Lilleshall Red limestone ; and Sandstone and ironstone, apparently from the coal-measures.
To these conglomerates succeeds a thick series of marls and sandstones, which belong to the uppermost divisions, but which do not come within the range of the district described in the paper.
The lines of joints cannot be easily recognized in this rock. A good case, however, occurs at Houghton, near Shiffnall, where several beds of the coarse conglomerate, above mentioned, are traversed by well-defined joints, ranging E.N.E.; and it presents great additional interest, from the marked illustration which it affords of the powerful action of the agent which produced the joints. The majority of the imbedded pebbles, some of which are six to ten inches in diameter, belong to rocks of great hardness, sometimes laminated, sometimes not, the matrix being the most friable portion of the stratum; the joints, nevertheless, traverse the beds perpendicularly, dividing them as with a knife, and pass through all the imbedded pebbles within their range. In any other fracture the strata present a studded surface.
ROCKS OF IGNEOUS ORIGIN.
In so disturbed a district as Coalbrook Dale, igneous rocks may be expected to abound. It has been stated that the coal measures and older deposits flank a great igneous axis, the effects of which are described among the lines of disturbance.” The elevated ridge of the Wrekin and Ercal is a portion of this axis, ranging S.W. and N.E. The nucleus of the Wrekin consists of a very hard, splintery, reddish gray liornstone,and that of the Ercal of a felspar porphyry or eurite, composed of light flesh-coloured compact felspar, inclosing a few small grains of colourless quartz and crystals of red common felspar. These rocks do not exhibit any indications of columnar structure. They are surrounded by a fine grained, hard, dark, dull-Iooking porphyritic greenstone, in some places slightly amygdaloidal, and traversed by parallel divisional planes. It has the appearance of having been tilted at angles of 50 or 60 degrees, by the interior nuclei, an arrangement which suggests the subsequent protrusion of the eurite; and from the manner in which the quartzose grits are connected with the greenstone, I am induced to consider the latter as one of those numerous igneous rocks, which are interstratified with the lower Silurian formations.
To the east of this main axis and parallel to it is a small ridge of dark, very compact greenstone (see Map, Plate XXXVI.). Another extensive outcrop of igneous rocks ranges S.S. W. and N.N.E. from the “ Spout ” to Steeraways. It consists of a fine-grained greenstone, generally syenitic and sometimes amygdaloidal, with siliceous and ferruginous concretions. This ridge has evidently been protruded, as it tilts the limestone eastward at a high angle. There generally occurs*, between the carboniferous series and the greenstone, a dark, hard basalt, passing into wacke, sometimes of a dirty yellow colour and a soft earthy texture; more frequently, however, of a dark liver-red, occasionally fragmentary and hard, with a lustrous surface, but oftener friable and clayey ; in some places it is amygdaloidal, with concretions of phrenite and oxide of iron. This superposition is observableat the Hatch (seePl.XXXVII., fig. 6.), and around Little Wenlock, where the dip of the trap conforms to that of the carboniferous limestone, which it immediately underlies. In the ravine at the northern extremity of the Dale, a somewhat analogous deposit is found, surrounded by the lower coal-measures; and incumbent upon a very compact basalt, divided into large irregular spheroids. A similar basalt appears at nearly the same level, a short distance west of the Horsehays, near the centre of the field. Proceeding northward, the coal-measures repose in places near Ketley upon soft earthy trap and common and amygdaloidal trap. No outcrop is visible ; but this superposition was discovered, some years since, in driving a water-level from Ketley to the Old Park ; as it passed for the greater part of the distance through an extremely hard crystalline basaltf. The level is abandoned, but it may be traced by the mounds of trap collected at the different air- shafts. I could not learn that the coal-measures were altered by the proximity of these igneous products ; and at the old pits at Little Wenlock, where the two rocks are brought into abrupt juxtaposition by a large fault (No. 23 of Map), intelligent colliers have assured me, that the coal shales and sandstone were worked up to their point of contact with the " black rock” or basalt, without presenting- the slightest alteration*; neither is the regularity of the plane of dislocation at all disturbed in this part of its course. (See Section 7.) I am, therefore, inclined to consider that the basalt and trap were ejected previously to deposition of the carboniferous series; and from the irregularity of its surface and the thinness of the carboniferous limestone, that the latter formation merely decreased the first inequalities, and that the coal-measures of this portion of the field were deposited on an irregular bed, consisting either of limestone or of igneous rocks. We have, however, elsewhere evidence that the coal-measures have been affected by other igneous rocks of more recent date. Thus along the boundary fault, although no trap crops out, it has been met with at various points below the surface. I have been informed, that in the boundary fault near Donnington furnaces and near New Hadley, a rock similar to the nucleus of the Wrekin was found in making a shaft; and at both these localities the coal near this fault is altered into a sooty substance. At the Madeley fault, near the Hay, the coal was in the same state, and the ironstone was red as if calcined. In these instances the deteriorated quality of the coal and ironstone, and the difficulty of excavating the hardened rocks prevented the workmen from proceeding in a direction which might have exposed more fully the cause of these changes. (See Sections 3, 4, 9.)
Other small bosses of greenstone and basalt appear on the side of the canal near the Horsehays, at Coalmoor Farm, Harris Coppice (Sec. 7, 8.), Saplin Farm, &c.; the two first protruding into the coal-measures, the last into the Wenlock shale ; and that at Harris Coppice separating the two formations. At the apex of the coal-field is the mass of igneous rocks forming Lilleshall Hill, the last visible effort, in this district, of those disturbing agents to which we probably owe the outcrop of the field. This hill consists of a nucleus of light greenish claystone, passing into a reddish gray hornstone, surrounded by a zone of greenstone porphyry, and therefore resembles in composition the Wrekin.
The igneous rocks are not, however, confined to the angular area of the carboniferous and Silurian series, for they protrude also through the new red sandstone which surrounds it. At Kinley Wich, a boss of hornstone similar to that forming the nucleus of the Wrekin projects through the sandstone.
The most important outcrop of igneous rocks in the new red sandstone occurs at Wrockadine, Seaton, Burcot, Rushton, and in Southward. It forms a slightly hilly district, rising to the height of about 350 feet above the level of the sea, and it ranges parallel with the Wrekin. Like that mountain it consists of greenstone, felspar porphyry, and hornstone. I cannot state accurately its effects upon the adjacent rocks, but it appears to have brought to day, on its eastern flank, patches of the coal-measures, in the same manner as at Longwood.
The minerals found in these igneous rocks are confined to small reddish crystals of felspar in the eurite of Ercal Hill; small crystals of quartz in the cavities and crevices of the greenstones, to a few veins of carbonate of lime, crystals of augite, grains of olivine and traces of iron pyrites in some of the basalts and greenstones. Phrenite and oxide of iron occur in the amygdaloids.
LINES OF DISTURBANCE.
Few coal-fields have probably been more shattered than that of Coalbrook Dale; and its numerous as well as extensive faults forcibly illustrate the energy of the disturbing agent. Deposits, several thousand feet thick, and occupying an area of many miles, have been shivered into fragments, and the broken remnants have been placed in the most discordant positions, and very often at levels differing from each other, many hundred feet.
In selecting the faults described in the following pages, I have chosen only such as illustrate the leading effects of the protrusion of the carboniferous and older rocks through the new red sandstone, and which exemplify the magnitude and direction of the disturbing power. I have prepared a tabular list of the effects of these major faults, together with those of numerous minor ones, which it would be tedious to notice in detail (See Appendix D.).
The collier can rarely proceed many hundred yards in any direction without encountering a fault of some magnitude; whilst slips or dislocations of less importance frequently occur every three or four yards. Although the continuity of the strata is thus interrupted, and some inconvenience is produced; yet the faults are accompanied, as many writers have stated in describing other coal-fields, by advantages which far outweigh the evils arising from their temporary obstructions. Various disjointed beds of coal and ironstone are thus brought on a level, though, if their horizontal range had not been disturbed, they would be separated vertically many yards. An instance occurs at Broseley of four beds of coal and one of ironstone, each separated by several feet of shale and sandstone, being rendered accessible upon the same adit by means of successive dislocations. Again, were it not for these fissures, a great portion of the deeper part of the coal-field would be unworkable, on account of the water draining from the higher strata. Through their agency also, the deeper seated coals and ironstones have been discovered and rendered available.
Previously to describing the range of the faults, I will briefly explain their nature and characters. The edges of the disjointed strata are generally in contact, or are separated merely by a layer, a few inches thick, of clay, frequently nearly white. The fractured surface is usually striated or ribbed vertically ; and, where this layer of clay is wanting, the coal, as well as the bituminous shale, presents highly polished surfaces. In some parts of the-field, the colliers have “ black and white slips5’ or very small faults, which cross at various angles. The black, which are almost always parallel to the main face of the coal, present smooth and polished surfaces, whilst the white slips contain a thin layer of clay. To this point I shall again refer. The inclination of the faults appears to obey no general law, varying in the range of the same fault from 45° to 90°. For instance, Mr. Jones of New Hadley found that the horizontal distances in the uppermost and lowermost beds of coal between the shaft of a pit near Potter’s Bank and the line of the Ketley fault, were equal, and consequently that the fault was perpendicular. This fault is, in other places, considerably inclined. When the sides of the fissure are perpendicular, they are commonly separated several yards, sometimes as much as forty or fifty, the interval being filled with broken debris of the strata. Generally, however, the sides of the fissure, instead of having been forced asunder, have been strongly compressed. In most cases the edges of the strata are turned upwards on the side of the lower level, and downwards on that of the higher, or in the expressive language of the colliers, " the measures rise to a rise, and dip to a swamp*.5’ There are a few rare instances, however, of the reverse. The following diagrams exhibit examples of small faults or slips in the lower coals. (For examples on a larger scale, see Sections, Plate XXXVI.)
A good instance of lateral pressure is exhibited in the following wood-cut, taken from a Section in the Holywell pits, Malinslee.
Generally, however, the strata on the sides of the small slips are not much contorted. The above instances (2, 3, and 4,) are more commonly applicable to the larger faults, as in 5. The following- section of the “best coal” along a level at the Meadow pits, Madeley, shows the prevailing character of the small disturbances.
Sometimes, owing apparently to the greater hardness of certain strata, the line of fracture assumes a step-like form, as in the annexed	diagram 7, taken in the lower coal level at Priorslee. Where two slips have met, singular effects have been occasionally
produced, as in diagrams 8 and 9 taken in the Hill's Lane pits, Madeley. No. 8 is situated in the best and clod coals, and No. 9 in the little flint coal, and is on a larger scale than the other diagrams.
These disturbances are difficult to account for: a, a' appear to be masses subsided or fallen into a wedge-shaped fissure, enlarged probably at the moment of disturbance by the increased separation of b and c, so that a! would fall into the cavity and crush down the seam of coal as in No. 9.
The intersection of two faults occasionally presents the phenomena in diagram (10).
A small fault or slip usually commences by a simple fracture, accompanied by a slight difference of level between the two dislocated sides; but the difference rapidly increases, until the smaller fault joins a larger fault (see Map, PI. XXXV., also a, Diagram 11, page 455). Thus the Arleston fault, which commences between New Hadley and Ketley as a simple fracture, attains, in the course of its range towards Arleston, and at the distance of about a mile from its first appearance, a vertical change of level of about 100 feet.
Numerous other instances might be adduced ; sometimes, however, a fault will thin off at each extremity in a simple fracture, as in fault 19, PI. XXXV., which ranges about half a mile, and produces a difference of level amounting to 30 feet in the centre of its course. In the Old Park, (Map, Plate XXXV. fault 33.) is a series of four of such faults, in parallel and consecutive planes, one fault commencing at a point in one plane corresponding to that where another fault ended in the adjoining plane. The maximum effect of one of these faults is about 24 feet, and the range of the whole amounts to nearly three quarters of a mile (see Map).
At Wrockadine Wood, two faults cross at an angle of 55°, and the disturbance of both amounts, at a few hundred feet from this spot, to 25 feet; but at the point of intersection the faults diminish to mere fractures, which do not affect the level of the strata.
Some of the small slips extend but a few yards and produce only 1, 2, or 3 feet of vertical disturbance. These minor  dislocations are so numerous that it would be almost impossible to lay them down.
In the map, therefore, I have represented only those which have not less than 20 feet of vertical change of level.
The annexed plan of a small district between the Boundary and the Ketley faults exhibits, however, the ramifications of the whole system of fractures. It is a solitary instance of a plan of all the minor faults carefully and minutely laid down by a ground-bailiff, Mr. Jones, of New Hadley. The numbers refer to yards, denoting the amount of disturbance, and are placed on the side of the highest level. Thus 1.0 or 0.2 denote that the fault at its point of junction with a larger one produces a difference of level of one or two yards, gradually decreasing as it recedes from that point to zero.
All the large and main faults also vary greatly in the course of short distances. Near Woombridge church the Ketley fault produces a change of level between 500 and 600 feet; but at New Dawley, distant two miles, of only 40 or 50 feet. The Lightmoor fault at Snedshill produces a change of level of 300 feet; at the Dark Lane and Malinslee, of nearly 700 feet; at New Dawley, of 350 feet; at Dawley Green, of 400 or 450 feet; and at Great Dawley, of 500 feet; but at Lightmoor it diminishes to 300 feet. This variation arises partly from the junction of other faults, but is principally owing to a slight difference in the angle of dip of the disjointed portions of the coal-field. I have mentioned that the edges of the disjointed strata are generally much bent; the bend being frequently flanked by a series of small faults. Thus, in the following diagram of the dislocations, on approaching the Ketley fault, near Donnington Wood furnaces, a series of minor faults is represented flanking the principal or Ketley fault.
Scale, 150 feet = 1 in.
The same effects are exhibited in several parts of the Lightmoor fault, and likewise precede the Madeley fault near the Hay House. They were noticed also on approaching the line of the Great East fault at Southall. The rapidity of the dip stopped the miners before reaching the main fault.
The phenomenon of a principal fault flanked by numerous smaller ones, is termed by the colliers “ the splitting of a fault.” Thus the Ketley fault is said to split upon approaching the boundary fault near Donnington Wood furnaces. (See Map). Whether in this and other cases the side or branch faults result from a temporary and local division of the larger fault, whether they proceed in gradually diminishing magnitude from the large faults, or whether they form a series of small parallel and independent faults, I have no positive data to prove. I am however inclined to adopt the two latter hypotheses.
It is rather remarkable, that although the district is so much disturbed, and bosses of trap protrude in many places through the sedimentary strata, yet there is only one instance of an apparently continuous trap dyke. This occurs in the case of the Boundary fault, along which are indications of the proximity of trap, a mass having been met with near Woombridge, and the coal along great part of the line from Ketley to Donnington being converted into smut. This change of coal into a sooty substance has been noticed also at Madeley, near the Hay House. For an account of the effect of the trap rocks, see ante, p. 449, et seq.
The faults cannot be traced by any modification of the surface; as they pursue their course indefinitely over hill and through dale; and those towering- irregularities, due immediately to the convulsions, powerful effects of which are still attested by the fractured and shattered strata, have been leveled and swept away, leaving scarcely a trace of their presence.
It must, however, be observed, that, although the masses of strata do not retain their original superficial inequalities, as effected by the dislocations, yet these disturbances have materially aided in modifying the outline of the country, by bringing to the surface, rocks of different degrees of hardness, which having yielded very variously to powerful denudations, great diversity of hill and dale has been produced.
The “ Symon fault” not being the result of fracture, is treated of under the head of lithological characters. (See p. 432.)
Having taken considerable pains to trace the faults of this district, I am able to describe them in some detail*. To avoid minutiae, however, I have arranged them, as far as possible, in a tabular form ; and all dislocations of less than 20 feet of difference of level are, with few exceptions, omitted, as well as in the sections and plans. (See Appendix D.)
The two principal faults, called the Lilleshall and the Great East, diverge at an angle of about 20°, a little south of Newport, and bring up a wedge of the Silurian and carboniferous rocks into horizontal juxtaposition with the fractured edge of the new red sandstone. After ranging southward nearly four miles, a central axis of disturbance intersects longitudinally the included coal- measures, and divides them into three distinct systems, each bounded by prolonged and nearly parallel lines of fissure, ranging between the limits of N.E. and S.W. and N.N.E. and S.S.W., and called the Boundary, Ketley, Lightmoor, and Great East faults. The two exterior systems constitute at first deep troughs. This trisection of the coal-field forms a very marked feature in the Woombridge and Ketley districts; but as we proceed southward the depth of the eastern system of beds, compared to thal of the central, considerably increases, and in the same district the western becomes nearly as shallow as the central. Thus the coal-measures in the western and central divisions gradually thin off, until, in the parallel of Little Wenlock, they entirely crop out, after a range of 9 miles. Within the same range the eastern division increases in breadth and importance, but its continuity is for a short distance completely broken by the limestone fault, which crosses it diagonally from S.W. to N.E., and tilts up this division of the coal-measures to the westward. (See Map, and Section 8.)
After crossing the Severn the same eastern division widens considerably, but it is much broken and elevated by a series of transverse fissures, some of which are parallel to the limestone fault, but others are at right angles to it. In consequence of these dislocations the coal-measures gradually and irregularly crop out, and the Silurian rocks are brought to the surface.
The above systems of longitudinal disturbances are affected by numerous small transverse faults, which, proceeding from one of the principal dislocations, sometimes extend across to another, but more often gradually diminish in their range, and disappear. These transverse fractures diverge from the main longitudinal ones at all angles ; but the larger commonly at 90°. In the deeply seated strata of the northern portions of the coal-field, their number is comparatively small; but in the parallel of the igneous axis of the Wrekin they are extremely numerous. At Langley, Lightmoor, and Madeley, they are of rare occurrence; and again, as we proceed south over the Severn to the edge of the coal-field, they become very numerous.
Returning to the western system we find it gradually rising towards, and ultimately, obliquely intercepted and thrown out by, the mineral axes of the Wrekin and Steeraways, which we will now consider. The Wrekin is a long knife-edged mountain, ranging from S.W. to N.E., and rising to a height of 1320 feet above the level of the sea. It is formed by a central ridge of igneous rocks, flanked by the lower Silurian deposits. Its length, including the Ercal and Primrose hills, is three miles, and its breadth is about two-fifths of a mile. Towering high above the disturbed district, of which it forms the main axis, and still higher above the surrounding and extensive tract of new red sandstone, it constitutes a fine isolated and conspicuous object.
Parallel to the major axis, and on the north-west flank of the Wrekin, are evidences of a very large fault, by which the disjointed edges of the new red sandstone are brought into contact with those of the lower Silurian rocks. The latter are seen to dip rapidly to the foot of the Wrekin and Ercal hills; and although we meet with no section exhibiting their juxtaposition with the new red sandstone, still, from the circumstance of having found this deposit in a well on the farm close to the foot of the Wrekin, dipping but slightly towards the north, and again to the north-east, near Eaton Constantine; and, from the specimens dug out at the foot of the Wrekin, indicating that the beds there do not belong to the lowest members of the new red sandstone, and likewise from the formation ranging in a nearly straight line parallel to the Wrekin, and not extending into the transverse slopes and glens, I think we may fairly infer the existence of a very considerable dislocation west of the Wrekin, and into which the Boundary fault merges somewhere at the northern extremity of that igneous axis. Again, as we know the coal-field to be fractured, and its level, with regard to the new red sandstone, greatly altered, both on its eastern side and on its north-western, from Lilleshall to Steeraways, at which point commence the igneous axes of the Steeraways and Wrekin ; it follows, that as the coal strata are disturbed relatively to the new red sandstone in the parallel of Woombridge, so, in the parallel of the Horsehays, to the east of the Wrekin, where we trace the prolongation of the same disturbance in the coal-measures, the relation of the carboniferous series to the New Red Sandstone must continue the same; and that, though separated by the Steeraways and Wrekin hills, the terminating planes of both those formations must be fractures.
Nearly parallel to this axis of eruption, and at the distance of miles to the S.E., ranges another important but minor line of disturbance. In its course through the coal-measures, where its nature can be advantageously studied in the extensive works at Lightmoor and Madeley, it is known as the “ Limestone fault,” from the circumstance of its axis being composed of Wenlock
limestone and shale.
This disturbance forms an anticlinal line; and from the phenomena exhibited in its passage through the coal-measures, it appears that a narrow, central ridge of the subjacent deposits is protruded between the fractured edges of the carboniferous strafa, throwing them off, in nearly vertical dips, but in opposite directions, and producing a change of level, higher, on the N. W. side, by 200 or 300 feet. This disturbance, however, merely affects the position of the strata in its immediate proximity; for, at the distance of less than a quarter of a mile on each side, the usual slight dip to the eastward, is unaltered by it, even at the deptli of 700 feet. (See Plate XXXVI., sections 15 and 16.) The inclination of the included Silurian strata cannot be well ascertained, as they are much broken. The outcropping edges of the Wehlock limestone, which flank the southern side of this disturbance constituting Lincoln Hill, and Benthall and Wenlock Edges, dip rapidly towards the S.E., and have escaped the denudation which has removed the underlying shale from the centre and N.W. flank of the axis; wherefore the opposite dips, although very visible in the coal-measures, are not well marked, where the axis traverses the Wenlock shale.
At Benthall Edge, the centre and the north-western flank of the anticlinal ridge have, by the denudation of the Wenlock shale, been worn into a deep valley. At Tickwood Hill the strata are much broken, and have a quaquaversal dip. The southern prolongation of this anticlinal fault probably produced the well-marked ridge of Wenlock Edge.
Northward, the Limestone fault is not traced beyond Windmill Hill, but it continues its north-easterly range towards Shiffnall.
Parallel to, and south-east of this second axis, are several smaller disturbances, producing slight anticlinal lines, which present a central and broken nucleus, a few yards broad, bounded by two parallel fissures, from which the flanking and disjointed strata rapidly dip, and exhibit, as in the preceding instances, proofs of considerable lateral pressure. The first of these small
anticlinal lines is about miles to the S.E. of the Limestone fault, and ranges, by the Upper Ridding, across the Broseley and Bridgenorth road, at the Dean, to Willey and Shirlot. Another anticlinal line exists one mile S.E. of the last, traversing the Ludlow rocks and the lower coal-measures, and is exposed in the brook below Caughley, and near Linley Hall.
In the preceding cases the disturbing power appears to have acted in a direction nearly S.W. and N.E.; but at the northern apex of the coal-field is a short, eruptive axis of trap, partially flanked by Silurian and carboniferous strata, ranging nearly N. by E., and S. by W., and constituting Lilleshall Hill, which rises to the height of 433 feet above the level of the sea. It is
bounded on the N.W. side by a large fault, which brings the new red sandstone against the trap and the Silurian rocks and carboniferous limestone. In its prolongation towards the southwest, it joins the Boundary fault, whilst towards the north-east it apparently intercepts, at an acute angle, the Great East fault at Church Aston; and is most probably continued with it into the new red sandstone.
The abrupt termination of this axis on the south is remarkable. It should intersect the Donnington field, but we there find the strata in the plane of the axis, and distant from Lilleshall only 1 mile, entirely unaffected by it, and nearly horizontal, with only a few transverse faults; while as we proceed southward, it again shows itself in the elevation of the central division of the coal-measures of which we have already spoken. Its subsidence northward is equally rapid.

Notwithstanding all the dislocations, disturbances, and changes of level, which we have enumerated above, the coal-measures and the other formations are not much contorted ; neither is the angle of dip materially affected. Were it not for the actual exposure of a fault by means of sections, or more generally in the pits, its existence could rarely be inferred from the relative dips of the disjointed strata. I now allude to a case where a repetition of similar lithological characters renders a positive recognition of the majority of the strata impossible. For example: from the dip at Bullock’s Leasows and Randley, an observer might easily suppose a perfect continuity of strata between those two places—the planes having a similar inclination, and in no wise indicating the important intervening fractures. (See Section 6.) From the dip of the strata at Amies and Caughley, they might be supposed to range likewise uninterruptedly between those two places; whereas a disjointed section of New Red Sandstone separates them.
We might also imagine, from the dip of the carboniferous series at Steeraways, that a considerable fault ranged between that highly-inclined outcrop and the nearly horizontal strata half a mile to the east, but only small slips have been noticed. (See Section 5.) So on both sides of all the large faults, the disjointed strata preserve a near parallelism of dip.
Thus, notwithstanding all the dislocations, the deposits maintain a general dip eastward, dependent upon the main line of disturbance or the protrusion of the igneous axis of the Wrekin. (See Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, &c.*).
Diluvium, or Drift.
The district bears evidence of a powerful aqueous action on its surface, a large portion of it being covered with thick accumulations of gravel and sand. These deposits are frequently separable into two divisions : the lower consisting of a fine red sand, associated with beds of angular and rounded pebbles, derived from the adjacent rocks ; and the other of gravel, composed also of rolled pebbles of the neighbouring formations, with a few small boulders and pebbles of granite and older rocks, imbedded in a coarse, reddish sand, frequently much mixed with clay. Where the sand is wanting, the separation of the two gravels is almost impracticable.
The sand occurs in only limited patches, though of considerable thickness, both in the valleys and on moderate elevations, but more especially on the sides of hills. Thin, distant seams of marl and clay show the irregular and cur-
* From the phenomena detailed in the preceding pages, it appears, that the coal-field is but a fractured portion of a larger deposit; the remainder of which must, therefore, exist below the surrounding new red sandstone. From the large faults which we know to traverse the coal strata, and many of which are doubtlessly prolonged through the new red sandstone, the former may, in some places, be brought within a moderate depth from the surface. Still, from the proved irregular persistence of the coal and ironstone strata, it would require great caution in inferring the existence of those beds below any given portion of the new red sandstone, except in the places adjacent to the line of fault, where the coal-measures are well-developed and productive at their abutment.

vilinear deposition of the mass. In the sand are frequently found angular fragments of coal varying in size from a marble to blocks 5 or 6 feet in diameter; and extensive accumulations of local gravel, of very variable thickness, are generally exhibited in its lower part. I discovered no organic remains in this deposit.
On the hilly district south of the Severn the sand is not abundant, though traces of it occur in Benthall and Posenal parishes; but it has accumulated in beds of considerable thickness in the valley of the Severn from Coalbrook Dale, through Buildwas and Cressage, and thence westward, covering almost everywhere the Wenlock shale and Caradoc rocks. In some places, it forms small hillocks, as near Buildwas Abbey; at others, as at Strethill and Shineton, it flanks, to the depth of several yards, the sides of the hills bordering the valley. On the platform of the coal-measures it is again less abundant, and only in patches, as at Lightmoor, where it is dug for the use of the iron furnaces. It may be thence traced occasionally on the flanks of the hills and in the valleys through Dawley and the Horsehays, increasing in importance as it ranges northward, and extending over great part of New Lawley, New Dale, and Ketley. In the latter place it much resembles the sands of the new red sandstone, and is extensively excavated, for the moulds at the iron furnaces, by the side of the high road immediately west of the Ketley works. It also covers the surface rocks around Wellington, Hadley, and Woombridge ; likewise the low ground of Donnington, and the north of the coal-field. Westward of the Wrekin it appears very generally in the valley ranging parallel to that mountain.
The overlying deposit of gravel is of more general occurrence. It consists of rolled pebbles of the adjoining Silurian and trap rocks, limestone, red sandstone, the shales, sandstone, &c. of the coal-measures; also of a few small boulders of granite, and schistose rocks. Fossils from the Wenlock shale and limeslone are extremely abundant in it at Madeley and on the south of the Severn. In some parts of the valley on the eastern flank of the Wrekin, this drift is imbedded in a tough, brownish clay derived apparently from the degradation of the trap and other igneous rocks of the neighbourhood.
Mr. Thursfield of Broseley discovered in the Willey gravel-pits a very singular fossil. It was much water-worn, but displayed a chambered tube inclosed in a sheath, to which it was attached by connecting septa. Prom its mineralogical character, it had been probably derived from the Wenlock limestone or shale. It possesses considerable similarity to the Orthoceratites from the shores of Lake Huron, figured in one of the plates which accompanies Dr. Bigsby’s paper, in the Geological Transactions, 2nd Series, Vol. I.
Beds of coarse gravel and sand, formed apparently by the junction of the two foregoing divisions, abound in the valleys and on many of the hills from Bridgenorth to Lilleshall, accumulating in great thickness in some valleys, as in Willey Park, in Lightmoor Old Park, New Lawley, and Woombridge. Although it ranges over several hills, attaining, as does the sand, a height of 700 feet above the level of the sea, still the summit of many of the hills and the surface of a few valleys are free from it. The thickest deposits are in the valleys running from the lowlands westward of the coal-field, as Muxton, Oaken Gates, Ketley, New Dale, New Lawley, and Buildwas. Eastward of the coal-field, it abounds over the new red sandstone, especially through the parishes of Sutton and Brockton. The rapid variation in the thickness of this deposit is everywhere remarkable. At Hills Lane, where the ground, although high, is level, the thickness in one place is more than 90 feet, whilst 100 yards distant it is only 7 feet. It is frequently found to be 50 to 60 feet thick, as at Willey, Lightmoor Park, in places near New Lawley furnace, Ketley, Woombridge, New Hadley, and Donnington. A good instance occurs in the valley extending from New Hadley to the Oaken Gates. Near Woombridge church the Ketley fault throws up, to the eastward, the lower series of the coal-measures, the strata cropping out successively on the sides of the hills, leaving the lower coal-beds in the valley; but owing to the deep and extensive denudation in this valley, the coals are frequently removed, and at other places are immediately overlied by the gravel, and cannot in consequence be worked. The denuding action of the water has here worn a deep and precipitous channel, on the north side of which the truncated coal-measures being cut off almost vertically, the gravel filling the channel acquires, in a few yards, a thickness of above 100 feet.
It thus appears that the drift has accumulated principally in valleys, hollows, and narrow channels, but that it spreads occasionally, in decreased thickness, over the high grounds*, materially modifying or leveling the more considerable irregularities of surface.
Marine shells of recent species are occasionally found in the upper gravel. Amongst them are specimens of an Ostrea and of a spiral univalve much broken, but apparently of the genus Turritellaf.
* The frequent occurrence of this drift interferes greatly with the examination of the surface rocks, preventing, in the more level districts, any natural sections from being exhibited.
f In Mr. Murchison’s account of this drift in its extension over Salop, Cheshire, Worcestershire, &c., the Buccinum reticulatum, Dentalium entalis, Littorina littorea, Tellina solidula, Carditim tuberculatum, Cyprina Islandica, Turritella ungulina, with fragments of Venus, Astarte, and Donax, are stated to have been found in this gravel; and amongst the localities quoted is one near Wellington. See Silurian System, p. 533.

Conclusion.
In the foregoing pages I have confined my observations solely to the geological description of the coal-field and the accompanying formations, without reference to any hypothesis deducible from the details. I now propose briefly to restate those facts, and afterwards to draw such conclusions as they may appear to warrant.
I intend, in the first place, to investigate the mode of deposition, and to endeavour to ascertain the age of the coal formation ; secondly, to review the nature and effects of those disturbances which have so powerfully affected the several formations; and, thirdly, to examine the nature of the agents, which have since acted upon and modified the surface.
'The first point involves the disputed question, whether the coal was formed from vegetables which grew upon the spot now occupied by it, or from vegetables transported from a distance.
It has been shown that each stratum of ironstone and several of the beds of shale and sandstone are characterised by peculiar organic remains ; and in some cases of a most decided nature. Thus the " white flats ” are distinguished by several new and peculiar species of Trilobites, and the Penney- stone measures by Orthocera, Spirifers, and Nautili. Prom observations upon those beds which admit of ready and extensive examination, it has been ascertained, that the northern division of the coal-measures can be divided into deposits alternately characterised by marine with some fluviatile and terrestrial remains, or by solely freshwater and land exuviae; and it is not improbable that a further inspection of the less exposed strata will enable future observers to establish a greater number. At present I know of five decided alternations, and of two which are doubtful, as only fishes have been found in them.
These alternations necessarily lead to the inquiry—whether they were produced by oscillations of the land, whereby it was at one time submerged and covered with a stratum of silt containing marine exuvias, and at another raised and converted into a marshy tract, overspread with a thick, luxuriant vegetation, and harbouring in its shallow waters numerous freshwater shells, to be again submerged and overlaid by another marine deposit,—or whether the phenomena cannot be accounted for by supposing, that the coal-measures were accumulated in an estuary, into which flowed a large river, subject to occasional freshes charged with the testacea peculiar to its waters and the vegetation of the adjacent districts.
In examining the various strata, we obtain in their lithological changes some clue to the transporting power of the water by which the beds were accumulated. As there is a remarkable difference in the range of organic remains, attended also by corresponding but minor changes of lithological structure between the northern and southern portions of the coal-field, it will be necessary, in describing the mode of deposit of the measures, to refer as nearly as possible to the central districts, where the principal phenomena of north and south are co-existent. „The reader must bear in mind, that in the north of the coal-field at Donnington and Woombridge, the animal reliquim exhibit their greatest variety; that in proceeding south, they gradually decrease, the change commencing with those highest in the series; and that they eventually disappear with the Penneystone stratum at Broseley (see Plate XXXVII.): certain general lithological characters, subject, however, to considerable local variations, are co-extensive with these changes. When reference is made to local phenomena, it is always mentioned.
Immediately succeeding the marine deposit of carboniferous limestone are thick irregular beds of coarse sandstone, frequently passing into conglomerates, and containing a few impressions and casts of imperfect fragments of vegetables. They graduate upwards into fine sandstones and sometimes into shale. The crawstone, which occurs in one of these sandstones, contains numerous beautiful casts of the Stigmaria ficoides, of which the internal structure is sometimes preserved, also several species of Unio—the first trace of animal life we meet with in the coal-measure. The same Stimaria is also very common in the little flint-coal and sandstone above the crawstone.
The characters of this series, therefore, apparently indicate a period of considerable turbulence, or a sudden and violent change in the condition of the land succeeding a long period of repose, during which the carboniferous limestone had been formed.
In the lower strata the thick sandstones and conglomerates, the great and rapid changes in several beds at very short distances, and the local occurrence of one bed and the absence of others at greater distances, all indicate a period of much disturbance and sudden changes ; but these signs of varying velocities gradually diminish as we ascend the series. Such effects we are naturally led to expect, if we consider the great difference between the characters of the coal-measures and those of the carboniferous limestone. In the latter, we have every indication of a formation gradually accumulated in the ocean during a lengthened period, whereas the structure of the former denotes the proximity of dry land, and bears evidence of violent operations by which one portion of the bed of the ocean became dry land, while another was partially raised and converted into an extensive estuary, receiving the detritus borne down by the rivers intersecting the newly- exposed land. The abrasion of the recently elevated tracts, then but barely covered with soil, may account for the prevalence of thick, unproductive, coarse sandstones in this lower division, while the presence of a few coal seams, and of the crawstone with its well-preserved specimens of delicate Stigmaria, higher in the series, may have arisen from a more abundant growth of plants during a period of calm, succeeding the first effect of the change of level. The recent origin of the estuary and the violent action attendant upon the transport of the conglomerate, would account for the absence, in the lowermost beds, of marine Testacea.
The next series of strata, extending from the clod-coal to the Penneystone, consists, in the lower portion, chiefly of thick beds of shale, containing large quantities of finely-preserved vegetable remains, and alternating near the bottom very frequently with seams of coal. In the south of the coal-field some of the shales pass into sandstones, which always inclose an increased number of plants in passing from a fine to a coarser grain. This point appears to me to be important, and to prove either a greater supply of vegetable remains from a body of water more widely extended and of greater transporting power, or a more complete decay in the plants from the slower accumulation of the fine-grained sandstone. The coal-beds are far more persistent in this than in other portions of the coal-measures. Each bed is generally underlaid by a thin seam of indurated clay, containing few or no fossils ; whereas the overlying stratum succeeding the few inches of fine bituminous shale, immediately incumbent on the coal, is coarser and thicker and abounds in vegetable casts and impressions, which decrease rapidly in number as the distance from the coal increases. From these facts, I would infer, that the lower clay and shale were gently washed down during short periods of calm, and of rapid vegetation, and that the overlying coarser silt and sand were accumulated by increased volume and violence in the current, consequent upon the floods which originated the coal seams. It nevertheless appears probable, that no lengthened period elapsed between the uprooting of the plants and their entombment, for the casts and impressions in some of the roofs of the coal-bed, exhibit perfectly the delicate external organization of several genera of ferns and Lycopodiceae, and sometimes retain a portion of their vegetable tissue. The period, therefore, during which this series was deposited, seems to have been one of repeated but not violent changes.
Thus far, in the portion of the lowest measures which we have reviewed, the unsettled state of the land and water appears to have checked the increase of animal life. We now, however, arrive at a deposit, the Penneystone, indicating a long period of repose. This ironstone measure, in its interesting fossils, unfolds to us the existence of numerous marine animals—the great Megalichthys, the Gyracanthus, the Cyatkocrinites quinquangularis, together with a considerable number of Testacea*; but associated with them are a few large Unios, and remnants of vegetables. The slow accumulation, it is probable, totally prevented the preservation of the more delicate parts of plants, and permitted only small and worn portions of stems or branches, which resisted the lengthened exposure, to be preserved from destruction. So tardy was the accumulation of silt, as proved by the fine and homogeneous texture of the stratum, by the existence of shells in all stages of growth, and by their general and uniform dispersion, by the absence of the finer and more delicate parts of plants, and by the presence of parasitical animals attached to the remains of fishes and shells, that unless the body were encased in an ironstone nodule its decay appears to have been almost inevitable ; for, as before mentioned, the fossils are, with rare exceptions, consisting chiefly of the scales and teeth of the Megalichthys, found solely in the ironstone nodules, and not in the shale. The numerous Coprolites attest the existence of many fishes. Yet where are their remains ? Here and there only are a few preserved from that destruction to which long exposure most probably consigned the greater bulk of them.
A considerable interval seems to have elapsed between the accumulation of the Penneystone shale and the deposition of the overlying coarseish sandstone called the flint-coal flint; for in the north of the coal-field, thick tablets and large blocks of ironstone, containing a peculiarly crystalline compound of carbonate of iron and carbonate of lime called curlstone, lie on the top of the Penneystone shale; and in the same situation in the southern districts of Madeley and Broseley occur extensive tabular masses of conglomerate ironstone, varying in thickness from 1 to 12 inches, and consisting sometimes entirely of small white quartz angular pebbles, varying in size from a pin’s head to a small marble, mixed with grains of white decomposed felspar, and imbedded in a matrix of ironstone, with which it occasionally forms thin alternating layers. This conglomerate also contains small rolled pebbles of ironstone, characterised by the fossils of the Penneystone measures.
We thus have proofs of a transition from a long period of calm and repose to one of some violence, which apparently was continued in a modified form during the deposition of the overlying stratum of sandstone; for upon leaving the Penneystone, we suddenly lose all traces of animal life—the increased transporting power of the water accumulating thick beds of sandstone, and entombing large quantities of gigantic Sigillaria, Calamites, and Stigmaria. The vertical position of a few of the larger specimens, with their roots attached, does not mar the supposition of their having been transported, for the greater number of these fossils lie horizontally, or nearly so, and at all levels. The gigantic character of this Flora, so different from that of the other strata, appears to be a natural consequence of the long period of quiet during the accumulation of the Penneystone measure—a period during which the vegetation of the country flourished vigorously and uninterruptedly. May not part of the flint-coal which reposes upon this sandstone have been derived from the woody matter of the large vegetable casts entombed in the rock ?
The flint-coal lies upon this sandstone, and is, in the central and northern districts, covered by a thin stratum of a very fine, dark, bituminous shale, containing a few scales and teeth of fishes, and generally, in its upper part, a band full of crushed Unios, resulting probably from a suddenly increased fluviatile action succeeding a period of calm. This is further confirmed by the interpolation between the shale and the white flat measure of a stratum of coarseish freestone or sandstone, occasionally conglomeratic, which commences at Ketley, and rapidly attains a thickness of several yards, affording almost the first indication of a strong local action from the north-westward, and forming a thick and irregular sedimentary deposit betwixt the regular and quiet accumulation of the flint-coal bass and the white flat measure, which stratum thins out northward of Ketley; but to the southward of Ketley is in immediate superposition with the flint-coal bass. It is in this portion of the coal-measures, that the important variations, both in the organic remains and in the lithological structure of the northern and southern districts, begin to show themselves distinctly.
The white flat measure, which then succeeds, again brings us to a period, when conditions prevailed somewhat similar to those under which the Penneystone measure was deposited. Though the epoch was probably of shorter duration, yet we here find several new species of the Trilobite family, and a large proportion of Unios and of plants, the more delicate parts of which are well preserved, indicating, probably, a greater rapidity of accumulation than in the Penneystone ; whence the abundance of fluviatile, and the scarcity of marine Testacea.
The system overlying this stratum consists of numerous alternations of rather thick coal-seams, shale, and ironstone, and subordinate, fine-grained sandstones. The numerous remains of Sigillaria, Lepidodendra and other plants, generally associated with Unios, which occur sometimes, as in the blue flats, in great quantities,—the frequency of the repetition of the different strata, and their extensive and uniform persistence as far south as Lightmoor, appear to indicate many changes and extensive but not powerful floods.
Incumbent on the top coal, the highest in this last series, is a thin bed of fine bituminous shale, which again proves the existence of the Megalichthys and other fishes, probably marine, whose detached and scattered remains are preserved almost uninjured.
Next follows a deposit, apparently of rapid but tranquil accumulation, forming the ballstone measure, a stratum characterised by the delicacy and beauty of its Flora, and by the absence of animal reliquiae. The impressions of the leaves of the Cyclopteris, Neuropteris, &c., are so perfect, that it is impossible to imagine the fronds could have been transported by violent currents, or that they could have been long exposed to the action of the atmosphere and the water. The slightly rumpled appearance of the delicate and unbroken tissue of the Cyclopteris orbicularis, the sharpness and distinctness of every fibre of the Neuropteris gigantea, and other plants, could only have resulted from an immediate and tranquil entombment.

The hailstone is overlaid by a series of thick beds of sandstone, with subordinate shales, and a few limited seams of coal. The lithological characters mark a period of some duration, disturbance, and change, with a few intervals of quiet, as during the deposition of the brick measure and the blackstone. In the latter deposit we again find a few marine and fluviatile Testacea associated with land plants.
At Donnington, the thin bed of fine bass above the blackstone coal contains numerous well- preserved Lingulae, with other marine testacea and remains of fishes, indicating a nearly complete cessation of that fluviatile action, which in other parts of this series.accumulated such quantities of Unios.
The strong and intermitting fluviatile action was prolonged upwards to the Chance Penney- stone, where another considerable interval of calm occurred, during which marine Testacea again lived and multiplied, as is proved by the abundance of the Leptcena scabricula, associated with a few other marine Testacea and fishes.
The characters, above described, of the strata between the top coal and the Chance Penneystone are limited to the north of the coal-field, to which the accompanying coals and ironstones are almost entirely confined.
Above the Chance Penneystone,—the thick preponderating beds of sandstone,—the change in the mineralogical characters of several beds,—the scarcity of vegetable and animal remains, yet evidently with a continuation of a powerful aqueous action, probably resulted from a considerable mutation in the condition of the adjacent land, to which we shall recur shortly.
It will be now necessary to point out the principal changes of lithological characters and animal reliquiae of the coal-measures in their horizontal range:
1st. The lower series of coals, up to the Penneystone, are tolerably persistent throughout, from Donnington to Broseley; but above that stratum, the coals and ironstones, with their associated marine reliquiae, have a gradually diminishing horizontal range southward, so that the upper beds are limited to a small district in the north of the coal-field. 
2ndly. The absence of organic remains in the Penneystone at Donnington, and the gradual and rather abundant appearance of marine reliquiae, accompanied by a decreasing thickness of the stratum as it trends southward until it disappears at Broseley, deserve special notice. A narrow band of limestone, apparently of fresh-water origin, makes its appearance in that district higher in the vertical range of the measures.
3dly. Other changes, claiming particular mention, are the presence of numerous beds of red and variegated clays and marls, and calcareous sandstones, in the south-east of the coal-field, and the expansion of many of the shales and sandstones to the northward, with the abrupt thinning out of all the coals and ironstones above the Penneystone between Donnington and Lilleshall, accompanied by an increased importance in the upper series of soft conglomerates and sandstones.
4thly. It is necessary to mention the great variations of lithological character, and irregularity of range of almost all the arenaceous strata.
The conclusion, therefore, which I think may safely be drawn is, that the deposition of the coal-measures commenced immediately subsequent to some great convulsion altering the relative level of land and water; and—-judging from the peculiar lithological character, and the preponderance of large and aged corals in the carboniferous limestone, conjointly with its gradual thinning off in its range southward, indicating its accumulation in a tranquil and rather shallow sea, undisturbed by the immediate influx of any large river, yet evidently receiving, as the sea became deeper to the northward, a large supply of fine silt, perhaps from the northward—it is probable that the change consisted of a subsidence along the south-west shores of the sea in which the lower carboniferous limestone was accumulating; for had the movement been elevatory, a portion of the bed of the ocean, and consequently of the carboniferous limestone, must have been exposed, and outliers of that formation would most probably have existed at a distance from the coal-measures, which now, on the contrary, overlap its edges. Again, we could not expect to find in the detritus derived from land recently elevated from the bottom of the sea, remains of land plants fwhereas these remains are extremely common, and we even find a thin and irregular bed of coal at the very base of the measures. We may consequently infer, that an extensive area experienced a considerable subsidence, depressing one portion beneath the sea, and materially modifying the physical geography of the remaining dry land, giving rise both to a new line of coast and to a new system of drainage, enlarging some rivers and forming others. No sooner, indeed, do we pass into the coal-measures, than we find, throughout their entire vertical range, evidences of strong river action in the presence of transported vegetables, of which the majority are, according to A. Brongniart, such as might be expected to have flourished on low and marshy lands ; and fluviatile shells, intermingled with the marine Testacea of the sea into which they were drifted. From these great mutations would probably result—at first, barren conglomerates and coarse sandstones, succeeded by strata produced by a more fixed and settled order, as the effects of the preceding paroxysms were gradually softened down and effaced. Vegetation, it may be inferred, flourished on the land, and Testacea and fishes multiplied in the sea, during those intervals of disturbance arising from inundations and freshes of the river, which flowed probably from the south-westward, carrying its detritus into a sea, where the dispersion of it was apparently limited by a current from the northward.
While on this subject, a few remarks may be made on the debris forming he coal-measures, and on the origin of the ironstone. The fine-grained quartzose sandstones—the constantly recurring pebbles of white quartz— the general diffusion of mica, and occasionally of felspar and slate rocks, evidently denote an origin in the older stratified formations; whilst the red clays and marls, with the subordinate calcareous seams of the southern districts, may have been derived from the old red sandstone and upper Silurian rocks.
We find the peroxide of iron distributed in a greater or less degree throughout the whole of the coal-measures; but it is in those beds of shale only which appear to have been formed gradually and slowly, that we find it in any great plenty. This proves the abundance of iron in the rocks from which the silt was derived. Now we know that all trap rocks contain more or less iron. Dr. Withering found in those of Staffordshire, 20 per cent.* ; Klaproth, in those of Hazenberg, 20 per cent.f; and out of numerous specimens of basalt which he analysed, Bergman found, upon an average, as much as 25 per cent.fj;. As the ironstone itself contains only about 33 per cent, of iron, it would require no very extensive degradation of trap rocks to produce a bulk of ironstone equal to the entire volume of that existing in the coal-measures ; whilst the residual silica and alumina, in the proportion of about 73 of the former to 27 of the latter, give nearly the composition of the ironstone shales.
As a further support of this hypothesis, I have found, in several of the conglomerates of the coal-measures, traces of the debris of igneous rocks.
It has also been shown, that the carboniferous series frequently reposes upon beds of trap and basalt. From the soft and friable texture and rapid disintegration of many of these rocks, when exposed to the action of the atmosphere, they would admit of great abrasion, and afford ample materials for extensive beds of ironstone. The presence of titanium in the iron ore (see table of minerals, Appendix B.) tends to corroborate its derivation from these igneous rocks, as that metal is of very common occurrence in them. According to Mohs, sphene is found tc in beds of syenite, and other trap rocks§.” De la Beche states that “ Basalt is supposed to be essentially composed of felspar, augite, and titaniferous iron ||whilst Berthier says, “ mais c’est surtout dans les roches volcaniques, que le titane abonde; il y est tou- jours combine avec lefer et le manganese^I.”
It will readily be seen that the Coalbrook Dale coal-field differs greatly, both in its lithological character and its organic remains, from most of the English coal-fields. The latter are in general nearly destitute of animal reliquiae, and exhibit but few conglomerate strata, whereas the former abounds in both.
In the Coalbrook Dale field the mountain limestone has but a trifling comparative thickness; the millstone grit also is entirely wanting below the coal- measures; and as the organic remains present a far closer analogy to those of the carboniferous limestone of Yorkshire and Northumberland than to the coal-fields of those counties, it appears very probable, that this coal-field is of older date than most of those in the north and south of England.
The coal-fields to which it bears the closest resemblance are those of North Northumberland, Durham, parts of Yorkshire and Scotland. Many of the Conchifera and Crinoideae, the Conularia, the Megalichthys and Gyracanthus, which characterise the Coalbrook field, are abundant in the subordinate beds of limestone and ironstone in the Scotch coal-fields.
Mr. Phillips, in his excellent Illustrations of the Geology of Yorkshire, divides the carboniferous formation into three groups, viz. the Millstone grit, the Yoredale series, and the Great Scar limestone, each characterised by peculiar but variable lithological composition, and, during the prevalence of like conditions, by organic remains of a generally similar character.
Upon comparing the sections of Wensley Dale,\Vhernside, Penyghent, and Coverdale* with that of Lilleshall (pp. 425, 427), the general similarity in lithological structure is very striking; there are the same alternations of arenaceous strata with subordinate limestones, characterised by the presence of numerous Polyparia, some Brachiopoda and Cephalopoda, but with very few Crinoidea. Again, the resemblance between the black limestone group of Yorkshire and that of Steeraways, both characterised by the presence of Lithodendra and large Leptaenae (Producta), induce me to consider the limestone strata of Lilleshall and Steeraways as the equivalents of the Yoredale series, which Mr. Phillips has shown to attenuate and become finer grained as it ranges southward.
Supposing, therefore, that these limestones represent the Yoredale series, or a portion thereof, it is probable, that the measures of Coalbrook Dale, which immediately succeed, are coeval or synchronous with the lower millstone grit, and that the variable fine conglomerates and concretionary shales, forming the upper portion of the coal-measures, and eventually throwing out the coals and ironstones in the north of the field, may be the representatives of the Upper Millstone or Brimham grit. The greater abundance than is usual in the millstone grit, of many marine remains of the limestone groups, might arise from the augmented vertical range, in this district, of those conditions suited to the existence of Testacea, and which prevailed during the deposition of the lower series in the north of England ; still, from the littoral and fluviatile character of the deposit, it is possible, that its interpolations of freshwater and land detritus with that of the oceanic currents, may have been prolonged during the whole remaining carboniferous era, and even have continued to that of the new red sandstone, for it has been shown that in parts of this district, the coal-measures appear to graduate upwards into the lower new red sandstone; and Mr. Murchison has proved that in most of the adjoining fields, there is a conformable transition between these two formations.
Upon the second point, which refers to the nature and effects of the disturbances, but little need be said. It has been shown in the observations upon the faults, that the whole of the Coalbrook Dale district has been protruded * through the new red sandstone, and that this angular promontory of uplifted rocks forms merely the extremity of the principal zone of the Silurian system described by Mr. Murchison. This form of the detached area is due apparently to the intersection of two lines of disturbance. The more important one constitutes the axis of the Wrekin, with its parallel longitudinal dislocations and anticlinal axes, ranging nearly S.W. and N.E.; the other trends rather N. of N.N.E.; and the intersection of these two converging lines gives rise to numerous diagonal, connecting dislocations.
We have no direct evidence of the precise period at which the dislocations were effected. It can only be stated, that they took place subsequent to the deposition of the Lower Red Sandstone system.
From the details in pages 447 and 457, and from the description of adjacent coal-fields by Mr. Murchisonf, it is evident, that the coal-measures of Coal- brook Dale are but a part of an extensive deposit from which they have been disjointed and separated by great subterranean movements. Hence, we may infer, that a portion of that deposit still remains intact below the overlying formations of new red sandstone of Shropshire, Cheshire, and Staffordshire ; and it is not improbable that, by other lines of disturbances traversing these counties, the coal-measures, although covered by the new red sandstone, may be, in some places, at no great depth from the surface. But lines of dislocation are traced with difficulty through that formation, the different strata of which are rarely characterised by fossil remains, or by any great dissimilarity of lithological structure.
Underlying the new red sandstone, these coal-measures would probably have remained yet for ages unknown, had not portions of them been broken off and uplifted, and this too in an order beautifully commensurate to the wants of man. A few seams of coal and ironstone cropping out to day, originally led to the discovery of a valuable deposit; and though the means of working them were then limited, yet was the supply easily attainable. In time, as the demand increased, so did the means multiply, and thus were successively brought into use, the gradual descending downcasts of the coal-measures, from the outcrop at the Steeraways, then over the Ketley fault to the Lightmoor fault, which delayed further progress for some time, but was at last passed ; and now when that stage of the coal is exhausted, there appears every prospect, though at still greater depths, of a further supply, and probably equal to any with which we are yet acquainted.
The third and last point claiming consideration, is the nature of the agents which have modified the surface of the country. It having been shown in p. 452 et seq., that the disturbances which affected this district not only destroyed the continuity of the sedimentary deposits, but placed their fractured portions on widely different levels,—it follows, that if the surface had not been denuded, it would now present great irregularities, and even mountainous ridges, exceeding, in some instances, 2500 feet in height. The existing surface is, however, comparatively flat; and it is therefore evident, that, in the elevated central, western and southern districts, where only the lower divisions of the coal-measures remain—all the upper strata, amounting to not less than 800 feet, with at least the whole of the lower new red sandstone, which was probably more than 1200 feet thick, have been removed; and that in the valley of the Severn, as well as in that between Barrow and Shirlot Hills, not only have the new red sandstone and coal-measures been completely denuded, but also 500 feet ofWenlock rocks in the former instance, and 600 feet of old red sandstone in the latter.
Notwithstanding, however, the extent of these effects, still the diversity of hill and dale must be ascribed, as before stated, to the disturbances which have traversed every part of the district. Whether the change of relative level and the subsequent denudation were effected slowly or violently, are questions too complex for me to investigate in this paper; but I am tempted to infer, from the superficial obliteration of the faults, that the change in the levels took place under water, and that the surface was long exposed to its action. I would also infer, from the debris of Silurian rocks distributed through the drift, that during its accumulation, currents flowed over the coal-field from the west and north-west.
Although the remains of Testacea in the gravel are scarce and much broken, still they suffice to prove the identity of the shells with those of existing species, and therefore to establish the recent withdrawal of the waters.


