IN the year 1829, when I first became acquainted with that portion of the London clay formation which extends on the northern coast of Kent from Whitstable to Herne Bay, it presented, with exceptions too unimportant for notice, one uniform lithological aspect. The cliffs or escarpments on this line of coast, proceeding from Herne Bay westward, are Hampton Cliff, Studd Hill, Swale Cliff, or rather cliffs, for there are many, and Tankerton Cliff. Hampton Cliff attains an elevation of 100 feet, Studd Hill of fifty feet, and the Swale Cliffs average a similar altitude; while Tankerton Cliff, with its undulating outline, terminating at Whitstable, is about sixty feet in height. These several cliffs, in the year 1829, could be at once identified as members of the London clay, as well by their mineral aspect as by their organic contents. They were capped with vegetable mould to the extent of one or two feet; beneath which were three or four feet of yellow marl or brick earth, containing rolled and angular flints, numerous mammalian remains, and fossils derived from secondary strata. The flints and fossils were confined to the upper portion of this bed, and the marl to the lower. To this marl succeeded, in the descending order, the London clay, consisting of a dark brown incoherent rock, abounding in septaria, selenite and wood, completely pyritized. The fossil contents of the clay were also similar, or nearly so, in these several cliffs, consisting of the teeth and vertebrae of fish, nautili, and other marine testacea characteristic of the London clay, encrinal and pentacrinal stems, and the usual crustaceous remains. In none, however, did I ever discover a solitary fragment of the reptiles which have rendered the neighbouring cliffs of Sheppey so celebrated. At the period of which I am writing, 1829, with the exception of slender fragments of the trunks and branches of trees, fossils of the vegetable kingdom were rare.
Such was the condition, lithological and fossil, of these cliffs in the year 1829, and such, with the exception of Studd Hill, are the characters which for the most part still prevail. If there be variations in the conditions of Hampton Cliff, Swale Cliff, and Tankerton Cliff, they consist in the quantity and not in the characters of the mineral and organic contents.
  The whole of this line of coast is exposed to rapid degradation, from the encroachment of the sea, and from the influence of land-springs, the former undermining the cliffs at their base, the latter loosening and ultimately detaching, in the form of land-slips, the upper portions. So rapid and extensive is the destruction thus effected, that in the spring of each year, when the agents of violence are in their greatest activity, many acres of ground are removed in a single week, and the whole physical, outline of the coast is so altered, that the visitor of the previous summer can with difficulty recognize the scene with which, so recently, he was familiar.
  With regard to Studd Hill, the facts disclosed by this unceasing progress of degradation are singular and interesting. The marine character, as respects the fossil contents, which, in common with the neighbouring cliffs on either side, it presented in the year 1829, has been gradually becoming less prominent, while the tluvio-marine nature of its organic remains has, as gradually, become more so. During my visit in the autumn of this year (1839), I could not procure from it a single marine shell; the septaria had nearly disappeared ; no crustaceous remains were discovered ; and the only organic products which lent to the deposit the most distant pretensions to a marine origin, were a few fragments of encrinal and pentacrinal stems; the dark brown incoherent clay had also been exchanged for a deep blue tenacious clay ; selenite still abounded, and with it the source of its own existence, sulphuret of iron. The absence, however, of marine fossils has been abundantly supplied by a prodigious increase of terrestrial vegetable remains: I have collected and forwarded to Mr. James Bowerbank, who is publishing the Fossil Flora of the London clay, more than 500 fossil vegetable cones : fruits and other seed-vessels are as various and as abundant as those obtained from the Sheppey beds, and may be procured by the bushel; while the fragments of small trees or underwood, converted into pyrites, are so abundant, as to be removed for ceconomi- cal purposes by barge-loads : the collection and sale of the pyritical wood is a source of considerable profit to the neighbouring peasantry. The condition in which these vegetable remains are found, precludes the supposition of their having been much, if at all, drifted, the rounded and worn appearance of many resulting from the action of the tide and shingle upon them, after they have been detached from the cliff; those which are secured at the moment of their fall, preserve the smallest fibres uninjured.
  No land or freshwater shells have been observed.
  Struck by the fact of this total change in the character of the organic contents of Studd Hill, and notwithstanding the then unprecedented fact of mammalian remains occurring in the Eocene period of the tertiary formations, I looked with strong expectation for the evidence of some form of animal life, whether of beast or bird, destined to be sustained by so rich a provision. I was justified in this expectation by the knowledge that nature ever directs her means, as well in number as in fitness, to particular ends. My search was, however, fruitless until the month of September last, when, continuing my pursuit, I was fortunate enough to find the cranium of the Hyracotherium.
  The discovery of this Mammal, and the contemporaneous announcement of other mammalian remains having been obtained by Mr. Colchester from certain sand- beds at Kison near Woodbridge, and which strata are supposed to constitute a portion of the London-clay formation of that district, are facts of great geological interest. But whether the Eocene character of the Kison beds be ultimately established or not, the Eocene character of the Hyracotherium locality is placed beyond the reach of doubt. Independent of the intrinsic evidence of the locality itself, the associated fossils, identical with those of the neighbouring Sheppey beds, establishes the fact; the Sheppey beds themselves may be traced without a break to Studd Hill, and, with the exception of the superimposed diluvial gravel, there is neither above nor below the London clay at Studd Hill any portion of any other formation.
  The discovery of Mammifers in the London clay affords another instance of the fallacy of resting conclusions in natural science on negative evidence, which is, in fact, no evidence at all.
  In a former paper on the coast-section from Whitstable in Kent to the North Foreland, and read April 9th, 1834, Mr. Richardson described the changes which this part of the coast of Kent had undergone. He stated that the point still called the Old Haven to the eastward of Herne Bay, retains not a single feature to justify the appellation. The dimensions of the Haven were, however, at one time sufficient to afford protection to fishing-vessels of sixty tons burthen, though it is now unable to shelter a custom-house galley drawing one foot of water. With respect to Herne Bay, tradition preserves the memory of an upper and a lower bay ; and the inhabitants residing to the westward of the new pier, erected on a shallow, where the horn which separated the two bays projected, are said to live in the upper bay; but scarcely a vestige of either bay remains. In the same paper the author gave a detailed account of the structure of the London clay cliffs, a condensed notice of which is given by him in the above memoir on the locality of the Hyracotherium; but as his previous account of the plastic clay series is not alluded to
by him in this communication, it has been thought advisable to give the following abridgement. Only the sandy beds of the formation occur on this part of the coast. They first appear from under the London clay about three quarters of a mile eastward of Herne Bay, and continue to rise in an unbroken line until they attain the altitude of 100 feet at the Old Haven, whence they irregularly decline to a very low cliff, over which the sea breaks at exceedingly high tides, about one furlong west of the Reculver towers. From this point they again rise to the height of sixty feet under the towers, where the sands terminate abruptly as a cliff, forming only low land and marshes to the rise of the chalk near Birchington.
  The following sections are given of the beds near Bishopstone, and those which constitute the cliff on which are situated the Reculver towers.
  Teeth and other remains of fishes are found in the sands of the formation ; also testacea, though generally too decomposed to be preserved for examination, but the author found a Trochus, a Cerithium, and a Venus. Iron pyrites are sparingly dispersed through the strata; and a few dark lines indicate the existence of carbonaceous matter.
  The chalk rises from beneath the plastic sands at an angle of five or six degrees ; but the upper or flinty chalk is stated to have been removed throughout nearly the whole district from Birchington to Margate, the debris resulting from its destruction being spread over the hills as well as in the valleys.


