I HAVE the honour of presenting to the Geological Society a few specimens illustrative of the geology of the immediate neighbourhood of Reading; and I may, perhaps, be permitted to accompany them with a short account of the beds in which they were found.
   The substratum of the neighbourhood of Reading is the upper chalk, abounding in fossils and flints, many of the latter containing sponges or other organic remains, and very many having cavities lined with crystals of quartz of various colours, or with mammillated chalcedony. The chalk on the north-west side of the town, rises abruptly a short distance from the Thames, forming a range of hills ; but on the north-east more gradually, and the hills are farther from the river. The high land which, in Reading, separates the Thames and Kennet, rises suddenly from the Holy-brook (a tributary of the Kennet), but falls gradually towards the Thames from the Basingstoke Road to Caversham Warren. The highest part of this ridge is covered by gravel, under which are numerous beds of sand and clay, belonging to the plastic clay formation. In the Thames valley the chalk is principally covered with the gravel over which that river flows. To the south of the town is also a range of hiffh land, bounding- the Thames and Kennet valleys ; and, like the ridge between the two rivers, belongs to the plastic clay; while on the western side, in the Kennet valley, several brickfields are now worked through all the strata of that formation to the chalk; and it was in these beds that most of the specimens were found.
   In the Katesgrove field, wrought for considerably more than a century, the clay for bricks and tiles is procured from the side of the hill above the general level of the field; but the chalk, used for lime, is obtained from pits sunk beneath it, though never to a depth exceeding fifteen or sixteen feet, as the water prevents deeper excavations. The upper part of the chalk, for about a foot, is in a very singular state. It can scarcely be called chalk-rubble, but resembles wood which had been penetrated by the teredo, and the tubular cavities afterwards filled with sand. Covering this is the bed of oyster-shells, twenty-seven inches thick, but divided into two parts. In the lower, which is thirteen inches thick, the oysters are imbedded in a brown clay, and are much larger than in the upper, but are more difficult to procure perfect and to preserve, as they rapidly fall to pieces when taken from the bed. In the upper, which is fourteen inches thick, the shells are found in a bed of sand, containing minute green particles, and occasionally small green nodules and flints, some of which are rolled and some angular. In both beds the shells are accompanied with a considerable quantity of fishes’ teeth.
   Resting on the oyster-shell bed is another of clay, nineteen inches thick, parted by small seams of crystals of selenite; and on this are five feet of quartzose sand, near the upper part of which is a bed of ochreous nodules, from two to three inches thick, which yield an excellent pigment. The strata above this, as far as I can observe, correspond with the statement in Dr. Buckland’s Memoir, excepting that about six feet from the surface of the hill, is a thin bed of shells not noticed in that paper, nor in a passage in the Outlines of Messrs. Conybeare and W. Phillips, (p. 42.) when speaking of this place; or at page 39, where it is said, “ There is not the smallest trace of animal or vegetable remains in any of the strata of this formation at Reading in Berkshire, except in the green sand f.” In this field, where the bed is so near the surface, it is considerably decomposed and may easily escape notice; but in other places in the neighbourhood, the matrix in which the shells are imbedded is sufficiently hard to take a tolerable polish.
   The same beds have been worked through to the chalk, at spots on the other side of the Kennet, and nearly in a line with the Katesgrove field. They contain the sand with green particles and rolled and angular flints covering the chalk, as at Katesgrove, and occasionally oyster-shells and teeth. In making the new road into the town, on the eastern side, over the corporation property, the upper part of the chalk has been exposed and is covered with sand and rolled pebbles, but there are very few of the green particles, and neither teeth nor shells. In this spot the chalk rises very near the surface, and the sand with the pebble bed is very irregular in its thickness, and is covered with the vegetable earth; but in the upper part of a field on the side of the Oakingham road, immediately under the soil, are thick beds of gravel, containing chalk flints, some of them very little rolled, and abundance of organic remains, principally Echini and Terebratui in flint. In the pit on the Oakingham road bones and teeth of the elephant have been found.
  To return to the thin bed of shells near the surface at Katesgrove. I cannot discover that it has been found on the north-western side of the town; and it probably crops out at Katesgrove. In Clackman’s field, about a quarter of a mile south-east from that pit, in sinking a well the bed was found in a very perfect state about four inches thick, and about thirty feet below the surface; and the shells, though in a very brittle chalky state, were firmly concreted by sand. The best of the specimens are deposited in the Museum of the Reading Philosophical Institution. In these specimens, some of the shells are lined with crystals of iron pyrites and some with crystallized carbonate of lime. This stratum has also been found at several places south of Reading; and at Woodley Lodge, the residence of James Whitle, Esq., about three miles east of the town, the thickness of the bed is about an inch. It was found about forty feet deep, in sinking a well, and immediately under it a supply of indifferent water was obtained.
  It is also recorded “that in an unsuccessful attempt to procure coal at Hose Hill” (in the parish of Burghfield, and on the south bank of the Kennet Valley, about four miles and a half south-west of Reading) “a few years ago, a bed of cockle shells, firmly concreted with sand, was discovered about twelve feet below the surface.” This, there can be little doubt, is the same bed as that found at Katesgrove and at Woodley.
  Before I conclude I may be allowed to notice another fact connected with Reading, which has been verified by repeated observations and is well known by the well-sinkers. All the wells in the town (excepting those supplied by soakage or land-springs, which are mostly of bad quality), whether north or south of the Kennet, even those within thirty yards of its banks, are regulated by the Thames, rising and falling with the river, and not being at all affected by the Kennet floods. This may be accounted for by the Kennet flowing through a bed of tenacious clay, whereas the Thames flows through gravel immediately over the chalk, into which all the wells (except soakage wells) are sunk from ten to twenty feet. The depth of the wells from the surface varies of course according to the situation, some being from ninety to a hundred feet deep, others not more than fifteen to twenty.


