In a communication made to the British Association during its meeting at Bristol (1836), we first pointed out (by help of a section extending from the north coast of Devon to Dartmoor) the true geological position of the great culmiferous deposits, which occupy so large a portion of that county. In this paper our object is more extensive ; for we not only attempt to describe the order of the successive formations north of Dartmoor, but also, as far as we are able, to bring them into comparison with the formations which are expanded from the south side of the Dartmoor granite to Start Point, and to the other headlands of the south coast of Devon. We believe that our present attempt is almost entirely new; for though some portions of the county have been described in considerable detail, yet the several parts have not been brought into any distinct comparison with one another; and in all the published geological maps, the greater part of the slate-rocks have been represented under one colour, without an attempt either to separate them into distinct formations or to mark their succession. Still less has any attempt been made to bring them into a strict geological comparison with the other mountain groups of England and Wales. Our present object is to exhibit a synopsis of the evidence by which the successive formations are determined. But in future and longer communications, we hope to lay more ample details before the Society, and to describe a large number of organic remains, by help of which, the successive deposits may be referred still more precisely to their true place in the series of British formations, inferior to the carboniferous groups. We are aware of the great difficulty of our task, and if we can succeed in taking only the first step towards its accomplishment, our labours will be well rewarded.
Chap. I.—Five Geographical Regions of Devonshire.
Considered geologically, and under the most general point of view, Devonshire may be divided into at least five distinct geographical regions.
1st. One of them extends through the most eastern portions of the county ; and is almost exclusively made up of deposits belonging to the formations of new red sandstone and green sand. To describe any portion of this region forms no part of our present object. But we may just observe, that the new red sandstone is expanded through a part of it, in a series of rich valleys and low well-wooded plains, which are prolonged northward to the coast of Somersetshire; while the green sand forms, almost without exception, the summits of high barren tabular hills. These two characters, and the horizontal position of the strata, at once distinguish this first region from all the others.
2nd. The second region occupies all the most northern parts of the county; being bounded to the east by the Vale of Taunton, and the plains of new red sandstone above-mentioned, extending thence to the coast of Somersetshire ; to the north and west by the sea-coast; and to the south, by a line commencing at Fremington Pill on the south side of the Barnstaple river, thence ranging through a low undulating region in a direction about east and by south, (passing about two miles north of South Molton, Bampton, and Holcombe Rogus,) so as finally to terminate in the above-mentioned plain of the new red sandstone.
Along a considerable part of the north coast runs an irregular chain of rugged hills, intersected by some valleys of exquisite beauty, and forming a noble series of perpendicular cliffs and bluff headlands. One or two of the highest points of this coast chain, between Minehead and Combe Martin, reach an elevation of about twelve hundred feet.
In the interior of this region is a succession of still loftier elevations, (Dun- kery Beacon attaining the height of more than 1600 feet,) which in some places put on the character of a mountain chain. But what we chiefly wish to observe is, that these interior ridges form a regular crest or water-shed, which (with a few inconsiderable deviations) ranges as far as the meridian of Ilfracombe, in a direction almost exactly parallel to the southern boundary above indicated. From many parts of this water-shed, the country descends towards the south by a succession of long sweeping inclined planes; giving to the country an external character which is remarkably contrasted with the features of the great undulating region that lies expanded further towards the south.
3rd. The third region commences immediately on the southern limit of the second, and occupies a great superficial area; extending in length, from the plains of the new red sandstone, in the drainage of the Ex, to the western cliffs of the county; and in breadth, from the southern limits of the second region (as above described) to the northern flanks of Dartmoor and the hilly country S.W. of Launceston. The northern limit of this great area is therefore sufficiently well-defined for our present purpose. Its southern limits are not so easily described; the strike of the beds having (through a considerable extent) been interrupted and distorted by the protrusion of the Dartmoor granite; we may, however, state in a few words,—that the western extremity of the boundary-line runs into the sea immediately to the south of Boss Castle harbour, in the county of Cornwall, and ranging thence in a direction bearing a little to the south of east, it passes about a mile and a half to the south of Launceston, crosses the Tamer still further to the south, and just skirting the great mining-field north of Tavistock, abuts against the granite of Dartmoor. From this junction, the boundary-line is defined by the northern and north-eastern edge of the granite as far as the Bovey basin. The remainder of the line, from the Bovey basin, round the north end of Haldon, to the drainage of the Ex, is too complicated to admit of a clear description without the help of a good map. But the deposits of the third region are not confined to the limits here indicated, as they form an outlying mass resting on the limestone to the south of Newton Bushel.
The whole of the great area inclosed between these boundaries is occupied by rocks of one formation, the greatest part of which are thrown into violent undulations, exhibiting an incredible number of anticlinal and synclinal lines, generally running, with the strike of the beds, nearly east and west. These contortions are not merely seen in the cliffs and quarries, but they have produced an impress on the whole surface of the region ; which, without containing any hills of great elevation, is thrown into an almost continuous succession of undulations, resembling the waves of a tumultuous sea. These characters, however, disappear near the northern and southern boundaries of the region, where the beds generally acquire a more steady dip, and, as we shall hereafter show, form the bottom of a great trough, so as to repose on all the other stratified, as well as unstratified rocks, with which they come in contact. The great series of rocks, therefore, which occupy this third region, are the newest deposits of our north and south section : and without prejudging their place in the British system, we may describe them conveniently as the culmiferous series, inasmuch as all the culm works of the county have been opened in them.
The extent and true geological position of this great deposit had been generally misunderstood ; for though certain beds of culm had been long known and extensively worked in North Devon, yet they had always been described as mere bands subordinate to the old greywacke system ; and had never been regarded either as occupying a great overlying trough, or as composing a distinct formation. Hence, also, the black limestones which appear on both sides of the great trough and form a part of the base of the culm-series, had been confounded with the other calcareous bands of the inferior groups.
4th. The fourth region into which we divide the county of Devon is occupied by the granitic rocks extending through the whole of Dartmoor.
5th. The fifth and last region includes all the remaining portion of the county ; bounded towards the north, partly by the granite of Dartmoor, and partly by the southern skirt of the culm measures ; and towards the south, by the long line of cliffs extending from Babacombe Bay to the west side of Plymouth Sound.
We think that the five regions, above enumerated, form natural subdivisions, —not laid down artificially, to facilitate description, but well characterized, both by their geographical features and their physical structure.
Passing over the first region, we shall proceed to describe the second or hilly region of the north coast; showing, by help of natural sections, into what groups it may be conveniently subdivided. We purpose afterwards, in like manner, briefly to describe the fifth or southern region, to establish its subdivisions, and to bring them, as far as we are able, into comparison with the subdivisions of the second region. We shall then be prepared to describe the culmiferous rocks of the third region, and to show the relation they hear to all the rocks against which they abut, or on which they rest. In this way, after briefly noticing the general position of the Dartmoor granite, among the surrounding strata, and the characteristic phenomena at its junction with them, we hope to determine the whole sequence of the formations between the north and south coast of the county.
Our task does not, however, terminate here ; for by help of all the analogies with which we are acquainted, and more especially by help of the structure and organic remains of the several formations, we shall, in future communications, endeavour to bring them into comparison with the older groups of other regions. Before this can be effected, much no doubt remains to be done. We possess large materials, bearing on these questions, which have as yet been very imperfectly examined. All we can do at present is, to make a first approximation to the solution of these difficult questions. That they press upon us for an answer cannot be doubted, when we consider that no one has yet attempted any rigid comparison between the older rocks of Cumberland, Wales, and Devonshire ; that the antiquity of the slate rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall has generally been estimated by their mineral characters or by their vicinity to the granite—means which are not merely inconclusive, but often lead to conclusions which are absolutely false; and lastly, that the culmiferous series (occupying more than one-third of the whole superficial extent of Devonshire) has, under the name of greywacke, been confounded with formations, to some of which, at least, it bears no analogy, either in position, mineral structure, or organic remains.
Chap. II.—Successive Deposits between the North Coast of Devon and the Culmiferous Series.
Before we attempt any description or classification of these several deposits, we think it expedient to give a general account of their extent, and the places they occupy in the actual sections of the country. It will be seen, that our boundary lines (Map, PI. L.) inclose a small portion of the north-west corner of Somersetshire, which is too intimately connected with our second region to be entirely overlooked. Our examination commenced with the northern part of the Quantock Hills, which, although beyond the limits of the country indicated in the preceding portion of the paper, must also be briefly noticed. The northeastern flanks of these hills are composed of a soft, unctuous slate, not unusually of a red colour, here and there highly calcareous, and sometimes passing into thick, irregular masses of limestone partaking of the prevailing colours of the neighbouring rock. From beneath these, rises a system of beds which occupies the central and higher portions of the hills, and (as far as we could make out, from our hasty examination of a country so much covered with vegetation) is composed of hard, and sometimes coarse sandstone, alternating with more fissile, micaceous masses of finer structure, and with masses of soft, rotten slate, resembling the prevailing rocks of the upper group above described on the north-eastern flanks of the principal ridge. In the northern portions of these hills (where they are highest and best-defined) the strike conforms to their principal direction ; but further south, where they are lower and more expanded, the subordinate beds undulate, and seem to lose all regular hearing.
After crossing the plain of new red sandstone, which forms the western side of the Quantocks, we found a repetition of nearly the same rocks, viz. a series of reddish, soft slates, in some places highly calcareous, and containing beds of limestone, resting on an inferior system of harder texture, enclosing many beds of flagstone, shillat, and reddish sandstone, here and there almost passing into a conglomerate form. The upper series is well exhibited on the eastern skirts of Croydon Hill. The lower, with all its modifications, is finely exposed in Croydon Hill, Crabbist Hill, and North Hill, and is of very great thickness. In several parts of North Hill and Grahbist Hill, the strata are violently contorted, and the lines of disturbance are in various directions; yet on the whole, the strike of the beds seems to be nearly W.N.W. Part of Croydon Hill is thrown up in the form of a great elliptical dome, and the calcareous bands form a portion of an elliptical curve sweeping- round the eastern extremity of its longer axis; and it perhaps deserves remark, that the axis is nearly parallel to the principal direction of the strata in North Hill and Grabbist Hill.
In this part of Somersetshire, the strata are contorted, the hills discontinuous, and the sections broken ; yet the main fact, we have just stated, viz. the existence of a lower formation of coarse, arenaceous rock, often of a red colour and of an upper formation of calcareous slate, is established on sufficiently clear evidence, and leads us at once to consider the structure of North Devon.
The strata of North Hill are cut off'from the coast by the valley of Porlock, which probably owes its origin to one of the great breaks or contortions, that mark the neighbouring region. The same system of beds, however, reappears on the west side of the bay, and is continued to a headland a little northeast of Lynmouth, forming a noble succession of red cliffs, and a well-defined ridge running parallel to the coast. Along the whole of this line, the beds strike about W.N.W., and dip into the sea, at a great angle, about N.N.E.
If we make a traverse to the south from any part of the coast above men tioned, west of Porlock, we find at the distance of a few miles, though the strike continues about W.N.W., that the prevailing dip is reversed to the south. From this we discover, that an anticlinal line runs nearly parallel to the strike of the beds, and to the mean direction of the coast between Porlock and Countesbury Foreland. We further discover, that the mean direction of the beautiful gorge down which the waters of Exmoor Forest descend to Linton, very nearly represents the direction of the anticlinal. A great feature like this may almost always be traced to some geological cause; and we find that the strata bordering on the gorge are nearly horizontal, while those to the north and south of it continue for many miles to have a prevailing dip respectively to the N.N.E. and S.S.W. The pommel of the saddle is not represented by a mere line, but by a broad space, within which the strata are nearly horizontal, and on opposite sides of which their dip is not only reversed, but greatly increased in quantity. We may however state, with sufficient correctness, that the anticlinal line passes into the sea down the Valley of Rocks immediately west of Linton : for to the south of it, the beds acquire a steady southern dip; and to the north of it, though their dip for some way is very slight, a little beyond Linton they have, after some remarkable contortions, a high northern pitch. It is in consequence of this anticlinal position, that the coarse red arenaceous greywacke of North Hill, and of the cliffs between Porlock and Count,esbury, is repeated over again, and occupies the whole succession of great red cliffs, extending from the west end of the Valley of Rocks to Combe Martin f. Were we to draw two lines respectively from the Valley of Rocks and Combe Martin, in the direction of the strike, we should nearly define the range of the arenaceous system on the south side of the Lyne, as far as Exmoor Forest; and thence the same system is traced (though not without some interruptions) through the highest peaks of Somersetshire into Croydon Hill.
After the preceding statements, it must be obvious, that we class the gorge of the Lyne among valleys of elevation. The causes, whatsoever they were, which produced the anticlinal lines and regular strike of North Devon, acted also, in the region just described, on the hard, brittle beds of red, arenaceous greywacke; and thereby produced an enormous rupture along the line of contrary flexure, to which the present gorges of the Lyne owed their first origin.
This region illustrates also another point in geology:—when chains are well-defined, the anticlinal lines are generally steady in their direction, and nearly coincident with the strike of the beds; but the end of a chain of hills, or the outskirts of a physical region (such, for example, as the termination of the old rocks of Somerset and Devon, in the plain of the new red sandstone) is often marked by the greatest possible confusion, both in the direction and dip of the strata. The reason of this is obvious; for in such situations, the strata are exhibited in the very regions, in which antagonist forces were just on the point of overcoming those very forces from which the chains themselves, and all their accidents, were originally derived. This remark is, we think, well illustrated by the irregular undulations of North Hill, the interruption of Porlock Bay, the dome-like elevation of Croydon Hill, and, perhaps we may add, by the outlying ridge of the Quantocks.
It appears from what we have stated, that the lowest beds in this part of North Devon must be sought in the anticlinal region, and in the deep gorge of the Lyne. Accordingly, we there find a gradual passage into a lower system of soft, chloritic, fossiliferous slates, alternating with many harder, arenaceous bands. The upper part of the group is seen in the horizontal beds of the Valley of Rocks; the lower portion only in ascending the deep cleft of the Lyne. It is interesting, as forming the base of the old rocks of North Devon, and as being the lowest fossiliferous and calcareous slaty group ; but its whole thickness is nowhere exposed to view, and we are left to other evidence as to its place in a descending series of formations.
We have before stated, that the red arenaceous system, with a steady dip (about S. by W., or S.S.W.), extends from the Valley of Rocks to Combe Martin. Just as we turn the headland leading into the Combe, a new group presents itself, constituting a succession of cliffs of different colour and form, the highest beds of which run into the sea about a mile west of Ilfracombe Harbour. This group, near the coast, contains eight or nine distinct calcareous bands, some of which are extensively worked for use; and many parts of it are highly fossiliferous. Its average breadth is about a mile and a half, measured horizontally and in a direction transverse to the strike; and it may be traced without difficulty into the interior (especially by help of the calcareous bands), first in a direction about S.S.E., then along the south flank of Exmoor Forest, in a direction nearly east and west. We afterwards meet with it along the water-shed crossing the turnpike-road from Minehead to Dulverton ; and from that point (as before stated) it forms a great elliptical curve, sweeping round the eastern and north-eastern flanks of Croydon Hill. In this way we have a complete proof that the calcareous slates of Somersetshire, bordering on the Croydon hills, are the equivalents of those at Ilfracombe; and that the coarse red greywacke of Croydon Hill is also the equivalent of the red beds of the same structure on the coast between Combe Martin and the Valley of the Rocks. This is precisely the same conclusion which we attain, in a different way, by first identifying the formations of Croydon Hill with those of North Hill, and so linking them with the coarse red rocks of the Devon coast, on the north side of the great anticlinal line of the Lyne. The identification of the Ilfracombe system with the calcareous bands on the north-east flanks of the Quantocks, is not so complete; but it is, we think, highly probable, both from the lie of the country and the structure of the component beds. We have been the more particular in the preceding account, because it seems necessary to a clear understanding of the stratification of the region, and of the evidence presented by our transverse section.
The calcareous slate system of Ilfracombe, though interrupted by some violent contortions, dips, on the whole, to a point a few degrees west of south ; and is succeeded, in the ascending order, by a great formation of rocks, in which a slaty character predominates more decidedly than in any of the preceding systems. This slate group generally dips at a high angle, and is of very great thickness; less, however, than might at first be supposed from its breadth, which is not less than four or five miles, inasmuch as many of its beds are repeated again and again by a succession of anticlinal and synclinal planes, ranging exactly with the strike of the country. It may be separated into two natural divisions: the lower abounding in a greenish chloritic schist, much intersected by quartz veins, and generally too soft and shivery to be used for roofing-slate ; the upper containing also many soft fissile beds, resembling those just mentioned, but abounding also in thick, arenaceous beds, some of which are red and variegated, like the hard arenaceous bands eastof Combe Martin, while others are gray and greenish gray. The glossy slates of the lower division terminate on the coast near the north end of Morte Ray; and some hard, greenish gray, or purple, micaceous flagstones, form the highest portions of the upper division, and are, by a well-defined southern dip, carried under the next succeeding headland of Baggy Point.

The beds of the great double group, just described, range across North Devon, along with the calcareous system on which they rest, and are finely exposed in the cuttings of the new road from Minehead to Dulverton, where they agree so well with the corresponding parts of the coast section, that nearly the same description might serve for both localities. The upper arenaceous beds are well seen in the river gorges to the north of Dulverton. We have not traced this system further to the east; but it appears to range through Brandon Hill, and the elevated ground on the south side of the calcareous bands of Croydon Hill, towards the plain of the new red sandstone.
The fifth and last group of the northern region of Devon, commences on the coast, in the headland called Baggy Point, where the beds dip S.S.W. at a great angle. Many of them are composed of an arenaceous and siliceous flagstone, of a brownish gray colour; but they are neither so thick nor so firm in texture as the siliceous beds of the lower group, and are distinguished from them also by ferruginous earthy bands, with numerous casts of organic remains, which are wanting in the former. In rounding Santon Down, we find a system of brown earthy slates and flagstones thrown into a succession of violent undulations; but on skirting the marshes still further towards the south, in the direction of Barnstaple, they acquire a steady dip to a point about south by west; and with the same dip, they are seen in some low earthy cliffs opposite Fremington Pill, near Barnstaple, on the south side of the river, and are thereby carried under the base of the great culmiferous series.
By referring to the accompanying Map, it will be seen, that the breadth of this fifth group, near the coast, measured on a line perpendicular to the strike, is not less than three or four miles. Following its range towards the east, it is seen underlying the culmiferous rocks to the north of South Molton ; and the upper portion of it passes under the same rocks between Dulverton and Ex Bridge. (See Sect. fig. 4. PI. LI.). Still further in the prolongation of the line of strike towards the east, the mineral character of the group undergoes a considerable change. The brown and gray arenaceous flagstones of its inferior portion, often pass into a red sandstone, hardly to be distinguished from the red sandstone of the second group; and its upper portion at the same time passes into a beautiful bright red and variegated earthy slate, which underlies the culm series, and is well exposed in a rivulet between Trace Bridge and Stawley. Considered as a whole, this fifth group is distinguished by its lower arenaceous flagstones, with ferruginous bands of rottenstone, full of organic remains; by the dull colour and more earthy texture of its slaty beds; by its brown flagstones, covered with impressions of encrinital stems ; by its calcareous bands, sometimes passing into great lenticular masses (provincially called junks) of nearly pure limestone; and by its numerous, but generally ill- preserved, fossils. Many parts of it so exactly resemble the Caradoc sandstone, that we were, at first sight, led to place it provisionally in that part of the Silurian system.
Mineral Structure, Thickness, Fossils, of the preceding Five Groups.
In the preceding sketch, we have endeavoured to convey a true notion of the distribution of the natural groups into which the strata of a portion of North Devon may be divided, and of the evidence we have of their order of superposition. We must now add a few words on their structure, fossils, and other characters, by help of which, we may hope eventually to compare them with other rocks of the British series. (See Map, PI. L., and Sections I, 2, and 4, PI. LI.)
Our lowest group, as above stated, is seen in the lower part of the Valley of the Lyne, and in the Valley of Rocks, and the cliffs west of Linton. Ascending the valley from Lynmouth, the beds on both sides the river dip nearly north, but at a small angle. The most striking of them are composed of a hard, close-grained, greenish and reddish siliceous sandstone, much intersected by nearly vertical, transverse joints, slightly micaceous, and here and there traversed by earthy, cellular bands, marking the dip, and full of casts of fossils. These harder beds alternate with and pass into soft fissile and chloritic beds, much intersected by planes of cleavage, which hang towards the south—a direction opposite to the true dip of the beds. A little below Waters’-meet, the beds are so much contorted that it is difficult to draw any conclusions from their dip ; and some of them are highly calcareous and fossiliferous. The organic remains are, however, almost entirely destroyed by cleavage-planes cutting obliquely through them. On the banks of the tributary of the Lyne, south from Waters’-meet, the slates become so highly calcareous, that an attempt was made to burn them for lime; and we have been informed, that along the same strike of country, similar beds have been found in Exmoor Forest. In the higher parts of this group, the hard gritty and siliceous bands, generally of a dull gray colour, continue to alternate with the slaty and chloritic beds, and are in some places very fossiliferous, as may be seen in the Valley of Rocks, and at the great Castle-Rock on the coast; near which the series ends—being carried by a southern dip under the second group. A passage, indeed, seems to be made into the red upper group, through the intervention of some bands of red, earthy schist, alternating with micaceous and siliceous flagstone. In the absence of any visible base, it is impossible to estimate the entire thickness of the formation, we have been describing; but from the lowest beds in the gorge of the Lyne to the crests of the hills overhanging the Valley of Rocks, and still more to the beds of passage above indicated, there is a thickness of many hundred feet. Among the fossils obtained from this group (unfortunately in the form only of casts, and generally ill-preserved) we have many corals, an Orthis, and two Spirifers; but as we shall return to this subject, we will not, for the present, attempt to describe our imperfect list.
The most striking characters of the second group are its coarse texture, and red or purple colour. These colours are partly derived from the red oxide of iron diffused through the beds, and partly from the veins of the same mineral which traverse the cliffs, and are washed far and wide by the waters. Indeed, some of the beds themselves (where no veins intersect them) are so impregnated with an earthy oxide of iron, that they are dug up entire, and the richest parts of them are extracted for the furnaces. Cases like these are, however, to be regarded as rare exceptions. The coarser beds are generally thick, irregularly jointed, and break into rude, shapeless, angular fragments; and their colours vary through white, gray, greenish gray, variegated, and purple, to deep red. The coarsest varieties, at North Hill and in some parts of the Quantocks, pass into a conglomerate of red sandstone, with quartz pebbles, not distinguishable from the conglomerates of the old red sandstone. Some of the hills west of Porlock are. covered with a white sandstone of this formation, fragments of which lie bleaching on the moors, and might be mistaken, at first sight, for grits of the coal formation. The fine sandstones contain, however, fragments of clay-slate, and not unusually pass (through the intervention of purple, variegated, micaceous, flaggy grits, exactly like the flaggy beds of old red sandstone) into red slate, grey- wacke, and greywacke slate; among which, bands of fine, glossy clay-slate are here and there interpolated. Considered as a whole, and from mineral characters only, we might compare some parts of this group with the most characteristic portions of the old red sandstone. Other parts we might compare with the red arenaceous beds of St. Abb’s Head and the Lammermuir chain ; with the red sandstones and schists of the Longmynd, Lyth, and Haughmond Hills of Shropshire ; and with some of the coarser portions of the Upper Cambrian System, as developed in South Wales.
The whole thickness is exposed only in the coast section; extending, as before stated, from the west side of the Castle Rock to Combe Martin. The dip is steadily towards the south ; and there are, we believe, few breaks or dislocations by which the same beds are repeated over again. The breadth of the formation, measured transversely to the strike, is nearly three miles; the thickness of the group must, therefore, be very great. Considered as a whole, it is neither calcareous nor fossiliferous ; but by these words, we mean to state only that we found no fossils in it, and that at least they are very rare. We must remember, however, that it is interpolated in a fossiliferous system; and that a better search might probably bring to light a few fossils among the finer strata, alternating with the coarser red sandstones.
The next group of calcareous and fossiliferous slate is of very complicated mineral structure. The first beds are coarse and siliceous, and contain fragments of large, heart-shaped, bivalve shells. These are succeeded by clay-slate, more or less arenaceous, all dipping, as before, about S.S.W., and at a considerable angle. Ascending by the valley of Combe Martin to Yellaton (a distance of about a mile and a half), we cross not less than eight or nine courses of highly calcareous slate, in some places passing into great bunches of bluish crystalline limestone, with many contemporaneous veins. The limestones have some traces of organic remains, which occur also in abundance, but generally as casts, in the neighbouring calcareous slate. One of these calcareous courses immediately south of Combe Martin, is not less than 60 feet thick. In general, they are much thinner; and none of them are very continuous in the direction of the beds; but contracting to an edge, and expanding, several times, along the line of strike, they occasionally appear more like huge lenticular masses of semi-crystalline limestone, interpolated irregularly among the calcareous slates, than true alternating beds. Four or five of these calcareous courses have been traced, by our friend Major Harding, through the headland which separates Combe Martin from Ilfracombe.
The cliffs on both sides of Ilfracombe Harbour are interesting, from their great complexity of structure. Some of them are made up of alternating strata of hard siliceous sandstone; and beds of soft, glossy, yellowish green, chloritic slate : others are composed of dark-coloured clay-slate, with quartz veins, alternating with hard quartzose beds. Some parts are devoid of calcareous matter; others abound in it; and among the earthy slates, west of the harbour, are thin bands of limestone, almost made up of encrinital stems. Among the calcareous slates, we find quartz veins, sometimes ranging in long stripes, nearly parallel to the beds; sometimes in irregular zig-zags nearly transverse to them; land in one or two instances thin veins of arragonite range nearly parallel to the strike. In the cliffs west of the harbour, where the structure is thus complicated, the beds are violently contorted: still further west, they acquire the prevailing dip (S.S.W.), by which the distinct courses of calcareous slate, with great lenticular masses of limestone, are brought down to the coast; and the whole mass plunges under the next higher group.
The phenomena of slaty cleavage may be studied among these cliffs to great advantage. The average dip of the beds is about 35° to the S.S.W.; and among all the more fissile beds, we have a cleavage dipping to the same point, but at a greater angle; perhaps on the average as much as 60° or 70°. These cleavages affect also the calcareous beds, and make it almost impossible to ascertain their true dip in the quarries, where the contiguous strata are not exposed. The cleavage planes are not merely posterior to the beds, but are of a date posterior to those movements which produced the contortions: for there are several places, where these planes pass, without deviation in their strike and inclination, through a succession of violently-contorted beds. We may remark, also, that when any part of these beds is brought into such a position, that the cleavage becomes a tangent plane, the fissile texture will then coincide with the true bedding of the rock, and again separate from it, as the contorted beds deviate from the unvarying cleavage course.
All the neighbouring coast is intersected by joints, often forming a succession of great parallel open fissures. Of such there are two sets,—one to which we give the name of dip-joints is nearly transverse to the strike, and most frequently in a vertical or very highly-inclined position ; the other set (or strike-joints) is nearly coincident with the strike, and generally inclined at a great angle to the planes of the strata, and hence, where the strata dip to the south, these joints generally underlie to the north. This double system of joints divides many parts of the beds into a great series of rhombohedral solids. The cleavage-planes, in no instance which we observed, were parallel to these joints. Hence, also, it follows, that the jointed structure and fissile structure are not to be confounded. Almost all solid rocks have more or less of a jointed structure; but a small number of them have a transverse fissile structure. The two structures may, and do often, coexist, but, in all descriptions of old rocks, ought to be carefully distinguished from one another.
Such are the phenomena presented by this group in the only sections in which the successive parts are well exhibited. In its range towards the east, it is for many miles very ill exposed; being much covered by the vegetation and alluvial matter near the flanks of the higher rido-es formed of the harder beds of the second group. Between Timberscombe and Dulverton it crosses the road, as above stated, at the water-shed, and contains, at least, three distinct calcareous courses. Further east it again declines in elevation ; and the calcareous portion skirting the south flank of Croydon Hill is principally represented by one very widely expanded course of limestone, which is extensively worked. To the east and north-east of Croydon Hill it is again subdivided into several distinct courses of calcareous slate and limestone. These are precisely the phenomena we might have expected in such a formation. The structure seems to be most complicated towards its western extremity. Assuming the breadth of the formation at a mile and a half, and the average dip at 35°, we shall (after deducting for a few local contortions) have a very great thickness for this group.
Stems of Encrinites and portions of corals are among the abundant fossils of this group. Some of the calcareous slates of Ilfracombe are almost covered with the Favosites polymorpha, which is so abundant in the Torbay limestone. There are in this group also a Producta, several species of Spirifers, and other fossils, to which we shall refer in the sequel.
We have little to add to what we have already said, respecting the structure of the next superior group. The lower portions, which abound in soft chloride slates, exhibit very fine examples of slaty cleavage, as distinguished both from joints and planes of stratification. For example, in the cuttings for the new road in the hills south of Ilfracombe, the cleavage has a nearly uniform dip at a great angle to the S.S.W. or S. by W.; while the strata, as may be made out from the stripe, are here and there violently contorted. The same facts are still more clearly illustrated on the coast near Morte Point, and in descending into Morte Bay from the north. This part of the series abounds in large, white quartz veins ; several of which affect a kind of rude parallelism to the strike of the beds, but others are in undefined oblique directions. They are all to be regarded as veins of segregation, by some means or other superinduced on the rock, during the passage into its present solid state.
The upper and more arenaceous portion of this group, occupying the middle and southern end of Morte Bay, is ill exposed on the coast; but it may be considered to terminate in some thick and very hard beds of gray, greenish gray, and purple-coloured sandstones, alternating with thin beds of chloride and purple glossy slate. These beds may be traced along their strike through North Buckland, and thence, skirting the south end of the hills containing the old manganese works, towards Muddiford.
Notwithstanding the many contortions of the chloride slates, and some undulations (especially as shown in the sections on the road from Dulverton to Minehead) of the upper and harder rocks, the prevailing dip is towards the south ; and the whole thickness of this group is very great, perhaps greater than that of any of the other divisions into which we have separated the deposits, we are describing. In no part of it did we observe any organic remains.
There is no definite line of separation between this and the preceding group : for beds of siliceous sandstone, resembling those last described, continue for some way as we ascend the hill which runs out into Baggy Point. Gradually, however, the alternating glossy slates almost disappear, and the strata put on the form of gray and brownish gray micaceous flagstones ; and associated with them, near the top of the hill, are some cellular ferruginous bands, with numerous obscure casts of fossils.
Doubling Baggy Point and descending to the north side of Croyde Bay, slaty masses again abound, which, though very fossiliferous, and of much more earthy texture than those of the preceding group, have generally a true slaty cleavage. These cleavage-planes strike very nearly, though not always exactly, with the beds ; and in this part of the coast they generally incline at a high angle towards the north, the prevailing dip of the strata being towards the south.
Phenomena of this kind are always instructive, and are more especially so on the coast of Santon Down, where the beds are highly fossiliferous and thrown into a succession of undulations.
In this part of the coast, many of the rocks conform so nearly to the mineral type of the lower division of the Silurian system, that the descriptions of the slaty varieties of the Caradoc sandstone of Shropshire and Herefordshire might be applied to this Devonian series, almost word for word.
The lower or middle portion of the group, we are describing, may be easily followed along its strike into the interior of the country; and there are two quarries in it which deserve notice. One of them, first noticed by Major Harding, is near the inn by the road-side at Marwood, and exposes a set of strong beds of brownish gray and greenish gray sandstone; at the partings of which are several ferruginous, cellular, and earthy bands with numerous casts of fossils. The other is at Sloly, nearly three miles north of Barnstaple, and close to the turnpike road. It deserves notice from the structure of its coarse and thick beds of greenish gray and brownish gray sandstone, separated by the bands of earthy slate and shale ; and still more from the vegetable fossils discovered in it by Major Harding and the Rev. D. Williams, which will be described in another place. In both the above quarries the dip is almost south; but a little nearer Barnstaple, similar beds are reversed and thrown into undulations.
Lastly, the highest portion of our present group passes into a deposit of soft and rather earthy slates with subordinate bands of sandstone, and occupies generally a low tract of country skirting the northern boundary of the culm measures. It is very fossiliferous, and sometimes highly calcareous, passing, as before mentioned, into irregular masses (or junks) of limestone. These however, are seldom worked, in consequence of the immediate vicinity of the great open quarries of black limestone, found in the lower portion of the overlying formation.
In consequence of the undulations above noticed, and of the interruptions caused by the wide marshes bordering on the Barnstaple river, it is very difficult to make any approximation to the whole thickness of this group. We have, however, evidence enough to show, that the thickness must be very great, without taking into account the lower undulating masses. Beyond Dul- verton, in its range towards the plain of the new red sandstone, it becomes much more ferruginous, and is greatly modified in mineral structure, as we have already pointed out.
Among the fossils of the lower part of this group (Marwood quarries) are shells of the genera Cucullcea, Cypricardia, and Bellerophon. One species very closely resembles Bellerophon globatus of the old red sandstone. Nearly on the same line (Sloly quarry) occur the vegetable impressions above noticed. By far the greatest number of fossils occur, however, in the upper part of this group; and among them, we noticed innumerable crinoidal stems, many fragments of Trilobites, Orthoceratites, Terebratulae, many Spirifers, a few spined Productae, &c. &c. A more detailed account of these fossils is reserved for a future communication.

Such are the groups into which we have divided the deposits in the northern region of Devonshire. They are founded on analogies of mineral structure, on superposition, and on the existence of successive calcareous and fossiliferous bands; and it is important (at least till they are better known) to keep them distinct from one another. Some of the lines we have drawn, are, perhaps, artificial and arbitrary ; but so are some of those which divide our best known, secondary formations. Without something like the arrangement we have adopted, it would be difficult to give any clear description of the great deposits of the northern region ; still less could we hope to bring them into comparison with the successive groups in South Devon. At all events, we have shown that all the groups above described are inferior to the culm-measures of our third region, a fact with which we were unacquainted, when we commenced our task.
Chap. III.—Succession of Deposits between Dartmoor and the South Coast of Devon.
If a line be drawn (in a direction about east and west) from the limestone cliffs near Plymouth to the limestone cliffs of Berry Head, at the south end of Tor Bay, it will cut off the great south promontory of Devon, which terminates in three remarkable headlands,—Bolt Head, Prawle Point, and Start Point. Now, as in all this promontory the strike of the beds is nearly east and west, and the prevailing dip is south, it appeared to us that the coast-section from Plymouth to Bolt Head, and a corresponding section from Berry Head to Start Point, must probably cross the same succession of deposits. We examined both these sections, and our expectations were realized. North of the line above mentioned, the strike and dip of the strata are by no means regular. They gradually become affected by the granite of Dartmoor, and on doubling its southern end they are bent towards the N.E. In this way, rudely conforming to the mean boundary of the granite, they sweep round the south-eastern side of Dartmoor with a north-eastern strike and a prevailing south-eastern dip, as far as the basin of Bovey Tracey. If, however, we make a traverse from this side of the granite to the cliffs of Tor Bay, we gradually lose this regularity of strike and dip. The strata have been much disturbed at different periods, and exhibit many axes of elevation (probably derived from great protruding masses of trap) which conform to no given direction. The contorted beds of Tor Bay (which have been described in memoirs read before this Society) are fine examples of what we are here stating, and many others are exhibited in the interior of the district. In spite of this confusion, we easily ascertain that the limestone rocks of Tor Bay and Berry Head belong to the highest strata of the older formations on the south-eastern side of Dartmoor. Now the limestone series at Berry Head (both from the evidence of the coast section and from the evidence of the section along the estuary of the Dart) is found to plunge under the slate region, which is expanded through the great south promontory. Prom which it follows, that a section first from Dartmoor to Berry Head, and then continued from Berry Head (coastwise) to Start Point, must cross all the old stratified deposits of South Devon. We think there is no doubt that the Plymouth limestone is exactly or very nearly the equivalent of the limestone of Berry Head. Hence (after what has been said respecting the strike and dip of the country) it must be obvious, that a transverse section from the granite of Dartmoor to the Plymouth limestone, and then continued from that limestone (coastwise) to Bolt Head or Start Point, would also give a nearly perfect series of the strata of South Devon. We examined the several lines above-mentioned; and in the essential details of the corresponding parts, they appeared to agree perfectly, some of the lowest beds only being wanting on the line from Dartmoor to Plymouth. Our limits preclude minute details; but we will, in a few words, endeavour to describe the facts which are exhibited on those lines of section, and seem essential to our classification.
Commencing with the section from Dartmoor to Torbay, we pass over the stratified rocks immediately in contact with the granite; for in that association, whatever part of the series they may belong to, (and under this remark we include the culm-measures as well as all the older formations,) they become so entirely metamorphic as to lose all their distinctive characters. But at a little distance from the granite, (for example, on the north side of Ivy Bridge, and on the east side of a line drawn from Ugborough to Buckfastleigh) there are extensive tracts of a rock which deserves notice. It is hard, brittle, and porcelaneous; sometimes passing into a compact felspar, sometimes into a flinty slate or Lydian stone, not unusually resembling the well-known altered coal-shales in contact with trap dykes. We have no doubt that these rocks have been indurated by the action of the granite, as in following them in the ascending order, they gradually pass into the common dark-coloured roofing-slate of this country. Higher in the ascending section, the slates become calcareous, and here and there pass into masses of bluish gray limestone. Two or three distinct bands of this kind may be seen in the neighbourhood of Ugborough ; and in the range of the strata northwards, the calcareous portions unite into one leading mass, and swell out so much as to make, in the neighbourhood of Ashburton, a great feature in the district. The Ashburton limestone contains a few corals and some unascertained casts of shells. Immediately under one of the coral beds of the Ashburton quarries, is a remarkable band of highly carbonaceous black shale. The neighbouring beds of limestone are of a dark colour and very much resemble true carboniferous limestone. They do not, however, burn (like the dark beds of mountain limestone) into white lime, and therefore do not derive their chief colouring matter from carbon.
Still higher in the ascending section, the calcareous bands disappear, and we have again a succession of soft glossy slates (in some places used for roofing), with very few distinctive mineral characters, and generally without any cleavage, separate from the laminae of deposit. The upper part of this series again becomes calcareous ; obscure casts of organic remains are found abundantly in some parts of it; and among indurated slates associated with trap, which seem to underlie the limestone of Newton Bushel, are fine impressions of an undescribed Trilobite.
The fossiliferous slaty beds introduce the great upper or Torbay limestone, which is magnificently developed both in the interior of the country and on the coast.
The nature of this communication not admitting of minute details, we have so far omitted all description of the various trap rocks which occur on our lines of section. Some are of the nature of dykes, and appear to have been protruded at different times prior to the eruption of the granite, which (as was pointed out by Mr. Austen) they never penetrate. Other trappean masses are not only parallel to the beds of schist, but are associated with plutonic sediment passing into, and alternating with, the slate rocks. In such cases, we concluded (as we had done before in numberless instances seen in Cumberland and Wales) that the plutonic and aqueous rocks were contemporaneous.
In the slaty series between the Ashburton bands and the great upper limestone on the east side of South Devon, we may often remark, that the higher portions become arenaceous, and sometimes pass into a coarse red sandstone, not to be distinguished from the old red sandstone. Instances of this kind are exposed in Babbacombe Bay, in the hills N.W. of Totness, and on the banks of the Dart. Neither is this series altogether devoid of calcareous matter and beds of limestone, as may be seen in several sections to the north-west of Totness. We considered these beds as mere offsets from the great limestone ; but Mr. Austen has since shown us sections, which prove that at least some of them are true members of the middle slate series. They cannot, we believe, be traced far on the lines of strike, as many transverse sections give no indication of them. A more important fact, however, in the history of this great slaty group is the frequent occurrence of organic remains in the beds as they approach the great upper limestone. This fact (of which examples may be seen near Ogwell, near Pomeroy Castle, in the cliffs east of Torquay, at Mudstone Sands, &c. &c.) shows that the slates and overlying limestone belong to one uninterrupted series of deposits ; for in other situations the slates are very rarely fossiliferous.
The upper limestone in the eastern parts of South Devon generally appears in the form of great unconnected masses, more or less tabular, crowning the hills and surmounted by no newer deposits. In its structure, as well as position, it strongly reminded us of the masses of great scar limestone which rest unconformably on the slate rocks of Cumberland and Westmoreland. From this circumstance, and perhaps still more from some of its fossils, it has been occasionally confounded with the carboniferous limestone. But a portion, at least, of its fossils, more especially its corals, separate it from that limestone ; and the association of its lower beds with calcareous slates passing into the lower slaty system of South Devon, entirely preclude it from being grouped with any part of the true carboniferous system. The coast sections, however, seem to put the question out of all doubt. We have no hesitation in identifying the great limestones of Newton Bushel, Babbacombe Bay, and Torbay. Now the great limestone at the south end of Torbay, after exhibiting a number of contortions, and spreading out into a succession of mural precipices at Berry Head, is finally (at Mudstone sands) bent into a great arch which brings up the lower calcareous slates on which it rests, and causes the southern flap of the great limestone saddle to dip under the slate formation which is expanded towards the south along the shores of Start Bay. The same order of superposition is also indicated at Galmpton Creek on the eastern shore of the Dart, as well as at intermediate spots along the southern boundary of the limestone. (See Section 6.)
Thus we find, that the great upper limestone of South Devon is fairly interpolated between two great groups of slate rocks. Under such circumstances we are not surprised to discover that the calcareous beds have a continual tendency to thin out and come to an edge. This phenomenon (as also in North Devon) is best seen in the line of strike. Sometimes, however, we may see the beds thinning off in the line of dip; so that a mass of limestone will, in a vertical section, look like an acute wedge, driven in between the laminas of the slates. Cases of this kind do not produce any ambiguity, as the longer dimension of these wedges of limestone is always in the direction of the dip. The great limestone of Berry Head thins off in the direction of the Dart, and beyond the river seems to be replaced by several thin calcareous bands, alternating with the slate. Further west, these calcareous bands disappear: but a similar system, very nearly, if not exactly, on the same line of strike, is revived, and becomes of great thickness, on approaching Plymouth Sound.
If we cross the country from the south end of Dartmoor to Plymouth, we have a less perfect section than that above described., for the lower calcareous, or Ashburton, bands have almost disappeared. This may be easily accounted for; as even the thickest bands of the limestones, which are interpolated in the slate series, continually thin off; and in this case some of them may have been cut away by the encroachment of the granite.
Commencing with the boundary of the granite, we first meet with highly altered slates penetrated by granite veins, and tilted at a great angle. These, through various gradations, pass into the hard slates of Ivy Bridge, which, in the ascending order, finally pass into the ordinary dark lead-coloured slates, exactly like the courses overlying the Ashburton limestone.
In most parts of South Devon, slates are obtained from planes parallel to the laminae of deposit ; and, generally speaking, the transverse planes of slaty cleavage are incomparably less developed than among the schistose rocks of North Devon. But in a quarry about two miles south-west of Ugborough, we found very instructive examples of transverse cleavage, the planes of which had the exact strike of the beds, but were inclined at a much greater angle. Other, more inclined beds (both in the same and neighbouring quarries), were gradually brought into a position nearly coincident with that of the slaty structure, and then ceased to show any oblique cleavage planes ; a fact, which clearly shows, that the cleavage planes were superinduced on the beds after their dislocation. We remarked, also, that the best slates were obtained, not from the laminae of deposit, but from the oblique planes.
Near Ridgeway (on the Plymouth road) are several courses of trap, which range very nearly with the beds ; and a little to the north are quarries of slate, associated with trap. One of them gives some obscure traces of an oblique cleavage, and exposes purple and dark leaden-coloured slates, which are much indurated, and spotted exactly like the altered chiastolite slates of Cumberland, On the south side of the quarry, close to the trap, is a chloritic slate, with a few crystals of felspar; yet this chloritic slate seems, by most regular gradations, to pass into the ordinary dark-coloured slate. We need not dwell on details familiar to all who have examined the great slaty regions of England, but state at once, that, by a regular dip to the south, the whole slate series is carried under the Plymouth limestone.
In other respects this and the preceding section agree in their general details.
The Plymouth limestone is composed of a great succession of thick, well-defined beds, dipping south, at an angle averaging at least SO0 or 35°; and as its superficial breadth amounts in some places nearly to a mile, and it is not repeated by any great contortions, its thickness must be very considerable. Notwithstanding this, if we follow it to the east, along the line of strike, it comes to an edge at the distance of about four miles ; and if we follow it in the opposite direction to the Cornish side of the Sound, it thins off’ still more rapidly; so that before we reach White Sand Bay, it has dwindled down to a few inconsiderable red beds of calcareous sandstone, containing Encrinites and other fossils ; and further along the Cornish coast we lose all traces of it. A few masses of limestone, comparatively of inconsiderable extent and thickness, break out here and there, nearly on the line of strike between Plymouth and Berry Head, and seem to represent, in a degenerate form, the great upper limestone of South Devon. At Plymouth the strike is very nearly east and west; but following the strata towards the east, we find them gradually deflecting a few degrees towards the north, which necessarily throws the limestone of Berry Head a little to the north of the Plymouth limestone.
Before we proceed to describe our remaining sections, we may briefly notice some of the characters of the South Devon limestones.
Where the sections are complete, they are interpolated in a great slaty series, and, indeed, very often pass into mere calcareous slates, subordinate to the general mass: parts even of the Plymouth limestone pass into mere calcareous slates. Its bottom beds pass into the strata on which they rest: its upper beds, in like manner, are exactly parallel to, and pass into, those by which they are overlaid. Hence, the present inclined position of the calcareous masses is due to the same causes which produced the present position of the slates.
The want of continuity in the limestones proves, that the causes which produced them acted less generally than the mechanical causes that gave rise to the layers of mud and sand out of which the slate series originated. It is difficult to speculate about the origin of calcareous slates where organic remains are almost wanting; but many parts of the upper limestone seem to be, in a great measure, due to the action of animals which once inhabited shells and corals. Now, the coral reefs and shell beds of the ancient sea must have been formed at the same inclination with the beds of sand and mud which were contemporaneous with them, and consequently were once nearly level.
There is a strong resemblance in the mineral structure of all the upper limestones of South Devon : at one extreme they are earthy and slaty ; at the other perfectly crystalline. The most crystalline portions seem to have been formed about masses of abraded corals ; and many of the hardest and thickest beds have more or less of a brecciated structure, as may be seen in some of the well-known Devon marbles. A colour derived from red oxide of iron is often irregularly impressed on the beds of limestone; and as the same colours are found in the next overlying group, as well as in some of the beds, inferior to the great limestone, this circumstance often produces a striking appearance in the range of the deposit through the country. The limestone was probably consolidated sooner than the slate, and hence may have offered planes of greater resistance, during successive periods of elevation. It is to this cause that we attribute the existence of some flexures in the inferior slates, which hardly seem to affect the great overlying masses of limestone, and produce what we regard as a deceptive appearance of discordant stratification. What makes this explanation more probable is the fact, that the thin beds of limestone, and the calcareous slates, partake of all the complicated flexures of the slate series. The contorted beds of Purbeck limestone, associated with tabular masses of Portland rock, are examples of similar phenomena among secondary strata.
In some of the larger masses of limestone, the crystalline action, during the process of solidification, has almost obliterated every trace of deposit. All of them are more or less traversed by open joints; and some of the Plymouth beds are intersected by vertical north and south dip-joints of great regularity. The limestones are also occasionally divided into laminae by oblique lines of cleavage, like those before noticed near Ilfracombe. Fine examples of this structure occur in several places north of Totness, and in the hills on the east side of Brixham ; and the phenomena are the more remarkable, because an oblique slaty cleavage is very rarely seen among the neighbouring slate rocks. A certain quantity of calcareous matter seems in some instances to favour the development of this structure. For example ; along the whole course of the Dart below Totness, the beds are generally without the least trace of an oblique slaty cleavage; but at East Cornworth Creek, a band of limestone is dislocated, dolomitized, and tilted at a great angle to the north, and is overlaid by some calcareous slates, which, near the beach, dip north, at a small angle, and have a distinct cleavage, inclining south at 45°. An exactly similar phenomenon may be seen in a small mass of calcareous slate imbedded in the great contorted red sandstone south of Plymouth ; and there, also, the neighbouring strata are entirely without any transverse cleavage.
Before we quit the subject, we may notice one or two peculiarities of structure which are seen, though rarely, in South Devon, but very abundantly in the calcareous slates of the Cornish coast, west of Padstow. A slight change of colour generally marks the passage from one bed of slate to another; and hence, when several beds are cut through by an oblique cleavage plane, the surface of the slate so obtained is marked by a set of parallel stripes indicating the course of the beds. It is also clear, that slates obtained from laminae parallel to the bedding can never show a striped surface of the same nature. But some slaty rocks (e. g. on the coast of South Devon, near Avon Mouth, and on the north coast of Cornwall) have what may be called a false stripe, which is at first sight very deceptive. They are derived from beds, the fine laminae of which, in passing into a solid state, have been forced, by crystalline or mechanical forces, into wavy lines or flutings, sometimes nearly constant in their prevailing direction. Slates cleft off from such beds show stripes of colour parallel to the flutings, and are to be distinguished from the true stripe only by being worse defined and less uniform in their direction. That these wavy lines were produced by tension, seems probable when we follow their course, and see it marked by minute joints, filled generally with quartz. We never saw an example of this false stripe in any roofing-slate of Wales or Cumberland ; and the two kinds of stripe very seldom occur together. There are slates also from South Devon and the north coast of Cornwall, which give clear indications of a second cleavage plane affecting the elementary structure of the rock. We speak of a structure never, as far as we know, seen in the old Cambrian slates, and entirely distinct from the small double joints which so often separate individual beds into rhombohedral solids. This second cleavage is indicated by innumerable striae (looking as if made by a sharp instrument like a very fine comb) running through the chloritic flakes that separate the laminations. With care, a cleavage (generally with a rough surface) may be obtained along these striae, which occur indifferently both with the false and true stripe above described. The crystalline forces producing these striae have also produced mechanical tension, as the striae may be sometimes followed into minute partings, generally filled with quartz. On the river above Padstow are some beautiful examples of these complicated structures. A low cliff shows a set of contorted beds of calcareous slate traced by lines of organic remains: the beds are cut by oblique cleavage planes, producing striped slates. There is a second cleavage indicated by the parallel striae, and the whole mass is divided into rhombohedral solids by a double set of open joints, which do not coincide either with the strice or the stripes.
6. Lastly, before we proceed to the other sections, we may briefly notice the organic remains of the South Devon limestone. The corals in the Tor Bay, Newton Bushel, and Plymouth limestones, are very abundant; some of the species, more especially the beautiful feather-like coral (Favosites polymorpha), abounding at all the places above mentioned. Several species of Spirifers, Terebratulce, and other shells, bivalve and univalve, are, we believe, common to them all, as might be expected among beds nearly of the same age; but we purpose to return to this subject, when we have better specific evidence. Some of the red coraline, calcareous slates of South Devon cannot be distinguished, either by structure or fossils, from the calcareous slates near Ilfracombe.
We commence with this section, as offering the clearest evidence of superposition, and the best exposure of the successive beds; and after describing it, we shall briefly notice the corresponding section from Berry Head to Start Point. The upper beds of limestone are seen at Mount Batten, and are overlaid by a great, red, arenaceous group, which may be subdivided as follows:
(1.) Over the limestone is a brown and yellow earthy slate, with pyritous stains and iron veins, some of which run, in the form of strings, nearly north and south. This mass alternates three times with beds of impure limestone ; and the last bed occurs at Dunstan Point, where it thins out to an edge among the impure earthy slates. Several fossils have been found by Mr. Hennah in this part of the section, which may be considered as forming a kind of passage from the limestone to the superincumbent beds.
(2.) From Dunstan Point to Withy Hedge, the section shows a yellowish gray and bluish gray soft slate (shillat), with some quartz veins and coarse arenaceous bands.
(3.) Immediately over the preceding, and extending about three-quarters of a mile to Bovisand Bay, is a formation of bright red, and sometimes variegated sandstone, thick-bedded, and of coarse texture, but subdivided by bands of soft, glossy, red slate, and red micaceous flagstone. This division, in many parts, is exactly like the old red sandstone; and though thrown into violent contortions, it dips, on the whole, towards the south, and is of great thickness. It is overlaid by a reddish slate and. flagstone, which gradually passes into the next superior division.
(4.) On the south side of Bovisand Bay, the slates become so earthy as to pass into the form of shale, with many small nodules of ironstone ; and these are surmounted by variously-coloured earthy slates, alternating with reddish arenaceous bands, as seen in the cliffs of Crownall Bay, near the southern end of which is a patch of new red conglomerate, resting unconformably on the edges of the older strata.
(5.) Beyond Crownall Bay is reddish slate and flagstone, and coarse red sandstone, occasionally contorted and penetrated by large quartz veins; the contortions chiefly seen in the strongest and coarsest beds. These gradually pass into reddish, grayish, and greenish gray chloritic slates, with hard quartzose bands and quartz veins. They strike about E. by N. towards Wembury, are of great thickness, and may be considered as beds of passage into the next superior group.
Though the upper limit of the preceding group is ill-defined, it is, on the whole, very distinctly marked by its coarse arenaceous bands and its prevailing red colour : and as its breadth, measured on a line transverse to the strike (from Mount Batten to the cliffs opposite the Mew Stone), is about three miles, and its average dip is not less-than 35°, its thickness (notwithstanding the occasional contortions) must be very great. In its mineralogical characters, as well as in its thickness, it bears the closest resemblance to the red arenaceous rocks in the cliffs east of Combe Martin, the second group of our North Devon section.
The next group occupies the whole coast, from the cliffs opposite the Mew Stone to Hope Cove, near Bolt Tail—a distance, following the sinuosities of the coast, of more than twenty miles ; but the actual breadth of this group, measured on a line at right angles to the mean bearing of the beds, is not more than five or six miles.
The ascending section commences with the beds of passage above noticed; but to the south of the Yealm, the prevailing rocks are made up of a light gray and greenish gray chloritic schist, with quartz veins and quartzy concretions, and with subordinate hard arenaceous beds ; and they prevail all the way to Stoke Point, with a steady dip about S.S.E. Several of these beds seem to strike into the cliffs between Stoke Point and Erme Mouth, and are repeated over again; but south of the Erme there is a steady ascending section for about two miles. In the cliff between the Avon and the mouth of the rivulet that descends from the. north side of Ringmore, there are some anticlinal and synclinal lines, which we have attempted to represent in our section (PI. LI. fig. 5.). On the whole, however, the ascending series gains towards the south. The prevailing rock is a fine, greenish gray, and leaden-coloured glossy schist, and the prevailing dip is about S.S.E. or S. by E. Near Fishery the beds exhibit the minute striae which (in certain cases) we have considered as an indication of a second cleavage; here, however, there is no principal cleavage oblique to the bedding. The same series is also marked by beautiful flutings producing the pseudo stripe. Opposite Borough Island, near Avon Mouth in Bigbury Bay, the contortions are marked by a shattered cliff, with quartz veins and numerous joints; but further south, to a point about half a mile beyond Avon Mouth, there is a steady dip to the south, or south by east. We there meet with a synclinal line, which throws the beds into a trough, and produces a northern dip, that prevails, almost without interruption, to Hope Cove, where the whole group terminates abruptly against a formation of chlorite and mica slate.
Along the lines of strike, several of the more schistose beds are worked for roofing-slate, not generally of good quality; and, in all the instances that we saw, the slates are derived from planes parallel to the bedding. Immediately to the north of Hope Cove the beds are hard, quartzose, and dark-coloured; and on approaching the junction, they are altered and shattered, and penetrated in all directions by quartz veins. The actual junction is not parallel to either formation, but may be traced, at low water, in broken, zig-zag lines, showing the extreme derangement where the two masses are brought into contact. They seem mutually to wedge into and penetrate one another; and on the south side of the headland forming the junction, is a great mass of black- veined slate notched in among the beds of the older system.
From the lowest beds of this group to the highest (south of Avon Mouth), there is a breadth of four or five miles, measured on a line perpendicular to the strike. Hence, notwithstanding the contortions above noticed, the thickness of the deposit must be very great, especially when we consider the high mean inclination of the beds, which is greater than that of the preceding group.
The junctions on the Kingsbridge river take place on low ground, and give no new information; but if we follow the strike across the promontory from Hope Cove to Start Bay, we may see the two formations in the cliffs south of Tor Cross. The phenomena are there much more simple than at Hope Cove: neither the upper nor the lower system is unusually mineralized, and there is no confusion in the dip. The lower beds (composed, on that part of the coast, of fine quartzose, chloritic slate), though highly inclined, and in some places contorted, dip regularly towards the beds of the upper argillaceous slates, which also, for a considerable way, dip steadily to the north ; but the immediate contact is unfortunately concealed.
To complete our section, it only remains for us to describe the crystalline group which extends to the extreme southern points of Devon.
Immediately to the south of the junction at Hope Cove, the crystalline slates are extremely altered and mineralized. Some are yellow, earthy, and pyritous ; others have become entirely earthy, are of a bright red colour, and, in their strike through the country, may be tracked through the fields by the red colour of the soil. Others, again, are partially indurated ; and we may here and there extract from them hard, laminated bands of quartz and chlorite; and among them are irregular masses of earthy, pyritous, decomposing chlorite. The beds, however, soon acquire a more usual mineral structure; undulate towards the south ; at Bolt Tail become nearly vertical; and afterwards pass, in a highly-inclined position, and after repeated undulations, to the extreme southern headlands. The prevailing dip is, however, to the north ; and the strike is nearly true east and west.
In mineral structure, this group is entirely different from anything we have described in the sections either of North or South Devon. It is highly crystalline, and essentially composed of quartz, mica, and chlorite ; the three minerals being frequently found together. Near its northern limit are some fine-grained, well-bedded rocks of blended quartz and chlorite, sometimes used as a building stone. More frequently it rises in large flaky masses, coated beautifully with mica and chlorite, and is used as a coarse flag-stone and coping-stone. In other places, from the occurrence of joints, the blocks are obtained in rude prisms, provincially called pencils, not unusually coated with red oxide of iron. The masses have both small and great contortions, so that it is difficult to find beds with smooth plane partings. Towards the south, however, (e. g. near Prawle Point,) we obtained beautiful and finely-laminated chlorite slate; and there are similar specimens of mica slate. On the whole, mica seems to abound more towards the southern, and chlorite towards the northern, extremity of the group; but the different varieties are so constantly mixed together, that it is impossible to divide the crystalline series into two formations. Felspar does not appear to exist as an essential constituent, nor did we see a single block to which we should give the name of gneiss. Pyrites is found in many of the beds ; and oxide of iron not merely coats the joints, in some cases producing what the workmen call iron pencil, but the mineral exists in regular veins traversing the micaceous slate. The finest example is at Seacombe Sands, (near the mouth of the rivulet that descends from West Prawle,) where there is a vein of iron ore about four feet wide, and another smaller vein near it. It strikes nearly east and west, and underlies north, at an angle of 50°. Had it been more nearly vertical, it might, perhaps, have been worked to profit. On the east side of Gunnor Head, near Prawle Point, is a similar vein striking north and south, and underlying west at a great angle. Works have been opened in this vein, but are deserted. There is also an iron vein at Stenhall, on the east side of Bolt Head, and another about two miles further west.
This beautiful but anomalous group is probably of metamorphic structure, and had entirely escaped notice before the commencement of the elaborate county survey of Mr. De la Beche.
It only remains for us to describe in a few words the section connecting the Torbay limestone with the crystallized slates of Start Point. We have before stated that the limestone of Berry Head is thrown into an arch which brings up the inferior slates in the cliff of Mudstone Sands (p. 652); and the same arch is continued in the calcareous system towards Galmpton. The earthy slates of Mudstone Sands become more and more calcareous and fossiliferous in the ascending section, and so gradually pass into the limestone. In the same manner, on the north side of Galmpton Creek we meet with the following ascending section: 1st, red sandstone and slate ; 2nd, red, gray, and leaden-coloured earthy slate, almost passing into shale ; 3rd, red and gray indurated shale and calcareous slate, with organic remains, and passing into the limestone. It is therefore obvious that the great limestone is intimately linked to the lower slaty system.
On the south side of the great saddle of Mudstone Sands the limestone again appears in the cliffat Sharkham Point with a high southern dip. The beds are confused and contorted by the passage of a great vein of iron that is worked, in the limestone, as far as Upton. A very little south of the iron vein is an interpolated mass or dyke of trap which breaks out, here and there, in some ridges ranging towards a point north of South Down. Beyond the trap, the beds of limestone are seen in the cliff with a very rapid dip to the south; but some of them appear to thin off and almost to come to an edge in the line of dip. The scale of our section enables us to represent these phenomena only in a general way. Notwithstanding the confusion on the coast produced partly by the iron vein and trap, the general mass of the limestone from Sharkham Point to Upper Brixham dips uneqivocally south, and so passes under the great slaty group that is expanded towards the mouth of the Dart. From all which we conclude, that the limestone of Berry Head has exactly the same general relations to the slate series of South Devon, as the Plymouth limestone.
The beds immediately over the limestone of Sharkham Point are made up of a gray glossy slate, dipping at a great angle about south by east. They are succeeded by gray, greenish gray, and variegated soft earthy slate, alternating with sandy red and variegated micaceous flag-stone, which occasionally passes into coarse thick beds. Some of the beds exhibit remarkable contortions, and a series of specimens might be selected from them which would be almost identical with a corresponding series from the beds of the first group over the Plymouth limestone. The red sandstone does not, however, here predominate so much as it does near Plymouth.
The rocks above described prevail as far as Man Sands ; on the south side of which is a soft silky gray slate, exhibiting at one single spot obscure traces of organic remains. This slate is overlaid, near the top of the high cliff going over to Scabbacombe Sands, by coarse arenaceous red rocks, like those above described. But they are again succeeded by a fine soft gray and greenish gray shillat, which, with many changes of texture and with many quartz veins and alternations of quartzose, arenaceous bands, is continued to the mouth of the Dart. On the whole, we think we may place the southern limit of our present group at Scabbacombe Sands : so defined, it is very nearly the representative of the red arenaceous group, above described, over the Plymouth limestone. It is, however, less perfectly developed than the corresponding Plymouth group, and, though on the same general line of strike, is a little further north, in consequence of a gradual change in the run of the beds.
The rocks south of Galmpton on the Dart agree in their general character with those of the present group ; the boundary of which may be placed on the north side of Dartmouth, but, from the continual changes of mineral structure, no two distant sections can agree in their more minute details. The further range of the arenaceous series westward seems to be marked by the hard, irregularly bedded, gray quartzose rocks of Morleigh Down and Black Down, first noticed by Mr. De la Beche.
Over the preceding group, and not separated from it by any well-defined limit, is expanded a slate formation of vast thickness. Soft glossy chloritic slates prevail, and alternate with arenaceous bands, and near Redlop Cove with a remarkable ferruginous whet-slate. Near Stoke there are some beds of flaky or semiconcretionary structure, like many beds associated with contemporaneous porphyries in Wales and Cumberland. Here, however, we saw no traces of trappean rocks. A little south of Stoke are some very fine beds of chloritic slate, exhibiting those wavy lines among the laminae, which produce what we have called a false stripe; but there were no examples of an oblique slaty cleavage. For a considerable way north of Street the dip is reversed to N.N.W., but soon after recovers, and dips about magnetic south at a great angle. No calcareous beds fit for use are found in this series ; but near Slapton it is overlaid by horizontal masses of new red conglomerate, which has been burnt for lime.
Near Torcross the dip is reversed to the north ; and in a cliff to the south of it is a gray, greenish gray, and blue slate, with many quartz veins, generally parallel to the beds, but continually thinning out and running into filamentous veins. With these beds we found some long, flat, calcareous concretions : but we did not observe any organic remains, in this or any other part of the group. On the whole, the mineral phenomena, on this part of the coast, though differing in a thousand accidents, agree in all their essential circumstances with those exhibited by the corresponding group in Bigbury Bay.
For some way beyond the beds last described, the dip is nearly north at a great angle—on the average not less than 60°. A long flat region then conceals the relations of the strata; beyond which the crystalline group, commencing more than a mile south of Tor Cross, occupies the coast to the extremity of Start Point. The highest beds of this group are nearly perpendicular—they are then thrown into cortortions—and then for a considerable way along the southern cliff have a steady dip to the north at an angle of about 50°. Still further south they exhibit the same modifications of mineral structure that we remarked in the cliffs between Bolt Tail and Prawle Point.
At their northern limit they are certainly less crystalline than at their southern. Some of the beds contain many elongated concretions of quartz, spangled with flakes of mica or coated with chlorite, alternating with laminae of dark chlorite slate; and associated with these are beds of very fine dark clay slate, of a structure intermediate between the slates of the second group and the crystalline slates of Start Point. It is obvious from what is stated, that there is no true passage between this and the preceding group; nor are the phenomena at the junction so instructive as those which occur at Hope Cove.
Such is the succession of rocks exhibited in transverse sections of South Devon; the whole ascending series being divided into four groups :
The slate-rocks bordering on Dartmoor, many parts of which are indurated and altered in structure by the action of the granite.
In a traverse from Totness to Kingsbridge we crossed a series of red arenaceous slates which seemed to represent, under a different type, the great upper limestone and its associated red grit. Near Kingsbridge the beds are highly inclined and thrown into great undulations, caused perhaps by the same disturbing forces which produced the undulations near Avon mouth.
A great zone of slates, more or less calcareous, and with subordinate beds of limestone: the lower portion containing the Ashburton bands; the upper containing the great Plymouth and Tor Bay limestone. The upper portion also contains occasional beds of red slate and sandstone ; which sometimes appear under the limestone, and sometimes seem to take its place along the lines of strike.
A great arenaceous group, containing many beds of red and variegated sandstone.
A group, with many courses of soft, glossy slate ; sometimes indurated, and used for roofing-slate ; alternating with coarse quartzose bands ; without any subordinate beds of limestone, and apparently without fossils. These four groups complete the ascending series, and are, together, of an enormous thickness.
Lastly; a crystalline group of micaceous and chloritic slate, unlike any other formation in North or South Devon; not co-ordinate with any of the groups above described ; probably of metamorphic structure, and due to some obscure axis of elevation, which has passed near the southern promontories of the county, and interrupted the succession of the regular ascending series.
Conclusions.
Comparing together the regions of North and South Devon above described, we find many points of resemblance, and some points in which their structure is remarkably contrasted. For example, trap rocks abound on some portions of the southern sections, but are never found in the northern. Again, in the northern region, a true transverse slaty cleavage is constantly developed among all the finer deposits; while in the southern, these cleavage planes are almost wanting, and nearly all the roofing slates are obtained from laminae parallel to the stratification. Yet in South Devon, systems of parallel joints are as common as in North Devon. What physical conditions have led to this remarkable difference of structure we do not at present inquire.
Judging both from the mineral structure and organic remains of the two regions, we are justified in affirming that neither of them exhibits any very old class of slate rocks. For example, none of the groups, either of the northern or southern sections, are to be compared with the rocks of Snowdonia or the green slates of Cumberland ; without including in our comparison the still lower group of Skiddaw Forest.
The preceding details show that there are many points of physical resemblan-ce in the successive groups of North and South Devon ; and that there is a near resemblance in many of the fossils, especially the corals. Hence we should provisionally refer them to one system. But as there are no sections connecting them unequivocally with well-ascertained formations, a more exact comparison and place of the several groups must depend on a future examination of the fossils.
Attempting, however, provisionally to bring the groups of North and South Devon into direct comparison, we were first induced to compare the highest calcareous group of North Devon (No. 5.) with the great upper limestone of South Devon. The two formations in a part of their range are associated with red sandstone; several of their fossils approach the carboniferous type, and some of their corals are specifically the same. But we were led to reject this hypothesis, chiefly because it left the great upper group of the South Devon slates (No. 4) entirely unaccounted for in North Devon.
The Ilfracombe calcareous slates very closely resemble (as above stated) some of the upper calcareous slates of Plymouth and Tor Bay. But if we rigidly identify the Ilfracombe limestone with the upper limestone of South Devon, we have the great red arenaceous group of Plymouth entirely unaccounted for in North Devon. On the other hand, the great red arenaceous group of North Devon (No. 2.) is, in its magnitude and general structure, almost identical with the great red arenaceous group over the Plymouth limestone. Notwithstanding our distrust of mere mineral characters, we seize on these groups as our best terms of comparison. On that hypothesis, the lower divisions of the South Devon section would be geologically lower than the lowest members of the North Devon section ; (which may be easily admitted when we regard the vast thickness of the descending series between Avon Mouth and Dartmoor (see PI. LI., fig. 5 & 9.)); and the calcareous slates of Linton would be nearly on the parallel of the Plymouth limestone.
Not, however, to push these analogies too far, we would, in a general way, bring the great calcareous and arenaceous series, between the North Devon Foreland and Ilfracombe inclusive, into comparison with the arenaceous and calcareous groups on Plymouth Sound; on which hypothesis the lower groups of South Devon are unrepresented in North Devon ; and the slate rocks south of the Ilfracombe limestone (group No. 4.) may be compared in a general way with the great upper slate group of South Devon.
We throw out these conclusions merely as provisional, and to be confirmed or invalidated by a more complete examination of the organic remains in the several groups.
Before we proceed to describe the culmiferous series, vve must notice the relations of the successive groups of North and South Devon, above described, to the slate rocks of Cornwall. The Plymouth limestone, as before stated, thins out to an edge in Whitesand Bay, being there represented by some inconsiderable beds of red calcareous sandstone and calcareous slate, with fragments of encrinital stems, and a few other organic remains. Nor does it again appear on the south side of Cornwall; being apparently cut off by the trending of the coast to the north-west of its line of strike. But the lower division of the fossiliferous slates of South Devon does pass into Cornwall, and gradually deflecting to the south-west, ranges through the cliffs at the mouth of the Looe River, through the hills near Talland, and thence by the hill above Lantivet Bay to the mouth of the Powey river. The same calcareous slates reappear on the other side of the river, and are traced continuously through Greber Head, the south-eastern promontory of St. Austell Bay.
At all the above-named places fossils are abundant, though generally in the form of casts, and sometimes much obscured by cleavage. Prom the beds near Fowey we obtained several specimens of a large, deeply-ribbed spirifer, casts apparently of terebratulae, stems of encrinites, and several fragments of corals. The same calcareous slates, sometimes passing into impure limestone, reappear near Yeryan, and thence descend into the cliff towards the north end of Gerran’s Bay—the last place where vve found any traces of organic remains on the south coast.
At Gerran’s Bay the strike deviates so much towards the south, that none of the calcareous slates pass through the cliffs that extend to St. Anthony’s Head. In their further range, they again undergo a considerable flexure towards the west, which brings them nearly to the mouth of the Helford river; from which they strike, on the north side of the great plateau of serpentine, to the opposite coast of the Lizard district.	
After what we had seen in South Devon, we were not surprised at discovering occasional traces of fossils along the lines above indicated. We were, however, astonished at the extraordinary number of organic remains in some parts of the country hitherto described as not fossiliferous. The calcareous slates are not confined to the line here indicated, but break out, on the eastern side of Cornwall, at considerable distances from the coast.

To the east of Looe, a section from the coast to the nearest granite exhibits on the whole a descending series ; yet we do not think that any of the beds of such a section ought to be placed at a lower geological level than the lowest slaty group of South Devon.
In the cliffs west of Looe there are many fine green, chloritic slates, alternating with greenish quartzose beds, penetrated by quartz veins, which have a prevailing dip about S.E. by S. But at Ore Point is a striped rock, with numerous red and green bands, alternating with coarse green, quartzose beds, much penetrated by white quartz veins. The dip is reversed to a point about N.N.E., and is not less than 70° or 80°; and some of the beds have a true slaty cleavage inclined towards the same point, but at an angle of not more than 50°. The coarse striped beds, sometimes alternating with bands of nearly pure quartz (very instructive, from their mineral structure, and from a number of poor mineral veins nearly parallel to a series of north and south joints), are continued nearly with the same inclination to Polparrow. At the entrance of Polparrow Harbour, the coarser quartzose beds are overlaid by a beautiful rock, with a perfect transverse cleavage, producing a fine-striped slate. The beds dip north, at a great angle, while the cleavage planes dip also north, but at a much smaller angle. Examples of this kind occur very rarely in South Wales; and we never remarked a similar case in the North of England ; for whatever be the inclination of the beds, the cleavage planes are generally inclined at a greater angle.
As the same prevailing northern dip is continued to the mouth of the Powey river, it is obvious that the beds above described are inferior to the fossiliferous group.
Similar indications of a northern dip are seen in a part of the coast section on the east side of St. Austell Bay. Commencing a section at Greber Head, and continuing it from thence through the head of St. Blazey Bay to the granite, we have the following order:
1. A series of quartzose and chloritic beds, continued to a cave under Combe Farm, with a prevailing dip towards the south. At that place there are large east and west joints, perhaps marking the presence of a fault; and beyond them the dip is reversed to magnetic north. The same phenomenon is also seen about a quarter of a mile south of Polkeris. 2. An ascending series, with a northern dip at a great angle, continued to Polmere Cove, where there appears to be a great break among the strata. The fossiliferous slates are in the lower part of this group. 3. A series of highly mineralized beds, with a southern dip, and extending to the granite. This division is traversed by some elvans, and numerous metalliferous veins ; but there is no proof that it is of an older date than the second group: indeed, judging from the sections, it only seems to represent the upper part of that group reversed and mineralized by the granite, and by the causes, whatever they may have been, which produced the mineral veins.
The section from the Dodman point to the St. Austell granite, exhibits still more striking phenomena, in the following order :
1. A series of rocks dipping to the south-east, and extending from the Dodman to the cliffs south of Porthmellion. 2. A series of nearly similar rocks, extending to the cliffs south of Mevagissey, and exhibiting several anticlinal and synclinal lines—their most prevailing dip being, however, to the north side of the strike. 3, A long ascending series, continued close to the granite, in which there is a decidedly prevailing dip, and generally at a great angle, towards the north.
Prom the preceding facts, it appears that a line of elevation, nearly on the strike of the beds, has thrown the greater part of the Killas between Veryan Bay and Looe into an irregular trough ; and that the crystalline, metalliferous slates skirting the south side of the St. Austell granite, instead of being among the oldest, are among the very newest stratified rocks of the south-east side of the county.
Nor does the mineral structure of the country throw any difficulty in the way of this conclusion. Many of the beds south-west of St. Austell are coarse, arenaceous, and sometimes of a red colour. Near Pentowan there is a series of coarse brown grits, almost resembling coal-measure sandstone ; near Mevagissey and Porthmellion there is a coarse, dark-coloured slate, with specks of mica between the layers, much penetrated by quartz veins and alternating with arenaceous flagstone; further towards Gerran’s Bay are thick courses of quartz rock closely resembling the masses of quartz rock in the great arenaceous group of South Devon; and in Gerran’s Haven we meet with many very coarse arenaceous beds deeply impregnated with yellow hydrate of iron, alternating with bands of yellowish red and dark blue earthy schist. The ferruginous beds are carried to the west side of the promontory, where they are associated with masses more coarse and mechanical than those above described ; and the quartz rock reappears in a rugged elevation south of Boswingran, and near Carhaise Bridge. We mention these facts to show the mechanical nature of many portions of this deposit. Other alternating portions have the usual characters of the finer chloritic slates of Cornwall.
The same group on the north side of the Lizard serpentine also contains calcareous beds ; not, however, passing into true beds of limestone; nor have organic remains been yet found associated with it. Among its upper beds are masses of coarse arenaceous rock, and beds of a very coarse red conglomerate ; and south of Mawnan it contains a fewr very thin carbonaceous laminae.
Before our visit in 1836, Mr. De la Beche had completed his survey of the north side of Cornwall, and laid down his results in admirable detail on the sheets of the Ordnance mapf. These he kindly communicated to us; so that in the few spots we visited to the south of Padstow, we only trod in his steps ; on which account we avoid all details respecting this part of the north coast.
The section from the slate rocks north of the Lizard to the cliffs north of St. Ives Bay, appeared to us symmetrical. On both sides the killas is thrown off by the granite ; and among the slaty and arenaceous beds which appear not far from Godrevey Island, are some cellular calcareous beds with ferruginous bands containing obscure traces of organic remains. One of the larger arenaceous masses reminded us of the Pennant stone of Bristol. We think we may safely consider these beds as very nearly the equivalents of a part of the group, north of the Lizard, which strikes into the coast near the mouth of the Helford river.
All the country round St. Agnes is so altered by the granite of Cligga point, by injected Elvan dykes, and by innumerable metalliferous veins, that we attempt not to define its exact geological relations—only remarking by the way, that after the facts stated above, we have no right to place the more crystalline slates of that district in any system lower than the groups above described.
Before our examination of the north coast, Mr. De la Beche had collected fossils from New Quay and other localities near the coast; also on the Padstow river, even so far up as the neighbourhood of Bodmin. We traced the calcareous slates with Encrinites, corals, and other fossils, through the cliffs north of Mawgan Porth ; and the series is continued into Permizen Bay, west of Padstow, where we had seen the calcareous slates with fossils during a former visit to the county (1828). South of the Padstow river there are many irregular contortions ; and the strike and dip undergo many changes, so that the fossiliferous slates are spread over a wide surface. It is obviously (after what we stated respecting the position of the beds south of St. Austell Moor) almost impossible to find any transverse section that will clear up the relations of the fossiliferous slates on the corresponding parts of the north and south coast. Provisionally, we identify the calcareous slates of New Quay, Padstow, &c., with the calcareous slates of Looe and Fowey. We see no reason whatever for considering one series older than the other; but fora final determination of the question we must look to a future examination of the fossils. The best fossils we possess from the coast near St. Columb Porth, we owe to the kindness of our friend Mr. Carlyon of Mawgan. Among them are Encrinites, two or three species of Orthoceratites, and several species of corals, &c.
The fossiliferous slates near Tintagel (first noticed many years since by Professor Buckland and Rev. J.J.Conybeare), cannot perhaps be connected by the direct evidence of sections with any of the preceding calcareous groups. The most remarkable fossil in these slates is a very large broad-ribbed Spirifer; and we found a similar fossil among the highly crystalline laminse of the slates near Lesnewth, in the range of the slaty mass several miles further to the east. Calcareous slates, very nearly on the same line, after doubling (along with a great series of inferior beds) round the granite, are carried by a strike about E.S.E. to the quarries near Trenalt and South Petherwin. From the very numerous fossils in these quarries (among which are many large broad-ribbed Spirifers, Productae, Terebratulai, two or three species of Orthoceratites, many corals, Encrinites, &c.,) on the whole, nearly resembling those of the great upper limestone of South Devon ; we should place these calcareous slates in an upper group of the great slaty series : and the conclusion is confirmed by the fact, that a section from South Petherwin to the granite, in a direction transverse to the strike, exhibits for five or six miles a regular descending series. These calcareous rocks are, in respect to the great overlying culm-trough, exactly in the same position with the calcareous slates of Barnstaple ; but on this fact, considering the ambiguous relations of the base of the culm-measures to the rocks on which they rest, we do not at present build any inference.
From the preceding details we conclude, that whatever classification be given of the slate rocks of South Devon, must also include all, or nearly all, the slate rocks of Cornwall. They form one continuous system, the several parts of which admit no comparison as to age, except that which is sanctioned by the evidence of sections and fossils. The slates of Cornwall are, on the whole, more crystalline than the slates of South Devon,—a fact, however, on which no classification can be founded, as the upper groups, when near the granite, are as crystalline as the lowest. Again, many of the subordinate beds in Cornwall are as mechanical in structure as the very coarsest beds in South Devon.

The general absence of transverse slaty cleavage, in the parts of the counties we are comparing; the occasional appearance of that structure, especially among the calcareous portions; the occasional appearance of a second oblique cleavage plane ; systems of dip-joints and strike-joints changing with the change of strike ; and many other common accidents of structure (not to mention mineral veins, elvans, contemporaneous trappean rocks, &c.&c.), may also be considered collectively to bear out our previous conclusion. We have thus cleared the way for a description of the great overlying culm-measures of the central region of Devon.
We have before stated that this series occupies a great trough, the axis of which ranges nearly east and west; and we have also indicated its north and south boundary in general terms. A formation may, however, be deposited in a trough, and yet the beds on its opposite sides may not exactly correspond. But in this instance there is no such ambiguity; for the bottom beds of the series have a peculiar mineral structure and are characterized by great beds of black calcareous shale and black limestone, with peculiar fossils, and these appear on both sides of the great trough.
That these lower beds rest on the highest group (No. 5.) of our northern section we have already given abundant proof. They are overlaid by an enormous thickness of contorted beds of shale and sandstone ; and, by a reversal of the dip, are finally brought out again to the surface and seen resting on the slate rocks of Cornwall and Devon, and on the northern flank of Dartmoor. The trough is therefore symmetrical, and the true bottom beds of the whole series may be studied in detail either on its northern or southern boundary. We have, therefore, a most unequivocal proof that the culm-measures are newer than any of the stratified groups associated with them.
It may be contended, that there is a passage from the base of the culm- measures into the old slate rocks of Cornwall and Devon ; and there may well be a mineralogical passage where both formations alternate with trap, or approach the granite, and so become metamorphic: but passages of structure proving a real continuity of deposit must always be difficult to establish among old slaty rocks, where similar beds recur at such enormous intervals. We must, however, allow that dark slaty beds and indurated shales occur in several places (for example, near South Petherwin ; in a mining work on a moor west of Lammerton ; and at the western end of Wheal Friendship;) at the base of the culm series, which it is extremely difficult to separate from the lower rocks ; but there is no ambiguity as to the order of superposition. In like manner, in North Devon, the beds of the highest group above described (No. 5,) pass regularly under the base of the culmiferous rocks, without the intervention of any conglomerate, or other appearance marking an interruption of deposit. But when one shaly mass rests on another, and is mechanically derived from it, we need not wonder at such a mineral passage. We have seen the old red sandstone on the coast of Caithness resting on granite and forming a most distinct mineral passage into it: and it was from overvaluing such apparent passages, that Macculloch was, for many years, led to regard the old red sandstone of the northern coasts of Scotland, as a part of his primary system. On the whole, therefore, we consider these supposed passages of little value in determining the age of the culm series, which we shall endeavour to discuss on other evidence.
Lower Culm Measures.
The lower part of this series is made up of dark-coloured shale ; sandstone, sometimes coarse, but very rarely passing into a conglomerate; siliceous flagstone ; and calcareous shale, here and there, containing subordinate beds of black limestone. The several members of the group are irregularly developed, and one part is expanded at the expense of the others; but the calcareous portion is very constant, and its position is near the top of the lower division. Where the bottom shales rest on the earthy slates of the older groups, it is not always possible to determine the exact boundary of the two formations. This difficulty, however, such as it is, very seldom occurs; as the inferior group abounds in fossils, while the culm slates are without fossils, and are also distinguished by their structure, being black and pyritous, and by occasional anthracitic stains between the laminae.
The western end of Wheal Friendship, (an east and west copper vein,) near St. Mary Tavy, undoubtedly runs into the lower culm-measures; the inferior and productive sinkings are probably in the older slates. On the other hand, Wheal Betsey, a north and south lead vein of the same mining field, is entirely in the lower culm shales and grits. We first thought an important inference might be drawn from this fact; but we afterwards found several east and west copper veins, further north, in the undoubted culm-measures.
We forbear to describe the confused junctions near Chudleigh ; where one of the great fossiliferous limestones of South Devon is surrounded by, and might seem to be imbedded in, the culmiferous rock. The phenomena are easily explained by the intervention of a fault. Neither do we purpose to describe in any detail the complicated junctions near Ugbrook Park, or an outlying basin of culm-measures south of Newton Bushel. All that side of Devon is extremely dislocated ; but the phenomena may be all explained, when the true order of superposition has been once settled on the evidence of uninterrupted sections.
These shales, in the ascending sections, frequently become semi-indurated ; and in that condition are generally thin-bedded, and the separate beds are divided into innumerable prismatic masses by small transverse joints. In the softer varieties these masses are generally rhombohedral. Again, the indurated shales pass into rather thin-bedded, hard, siliceous bands, each of which becomes separated into cuboidal divisions ; and the surfaces of the beds have what the workmen call a diced form, resulting from the intersection of parallel cross joints. This structure seems to be derived, in a great measure, from a tendency to a concretionary structure. These harder bands are often of a dark colour, and the partings are coated with earthy carbon, which stains the fingers. It is among the little transverse cracks and joints of the harder beds that a white earthy mineral greatly abounds. The white divisional planes are due sometimes to carbonate of lime ; but through a considerable tract running near the base of the culm series (between Barnstaple and South Moulton) the white mineral is chiefly composed of earthy Wavellite ; and occasionally the broken transverse joints exhibit the radiating crystals of that mineral in great perfection. Still larger parallel joints, affecting the whole series, also occur ; but these we are not at present describing. The same hard bands vary, however, greatly in colour, where the carbon is not present; and in several places they pass into a light gray, siliceous, brittle, jointed flagstone : and again, in some remarkable instances, they become almost white and porcellaneous, resembling a kind of china stone. Again the siliceous beds pass into a regular thick-bedded sandstone, resembling a coarse gray-wacke, or a grit of the coal measures : these latter varieties are, however, on the northern boundary (from which our present descriptions are chiefly taken) to be considered as the exception rather than the rule, and as subordinate to the carbonaceous shales and flagstones.
The beds forming the base of the culm series are somewhat differently developed on the southern boundary, in their range from the Cornish coast towards Dartmoor. We first meet with a highly carbonaceous and pyritous shale, dipping at a great angle from the chloritic and fossiliferous slate group of Tintagel. These alternate with coarse quartzose bands, sometimes thickly bedded, and resembling coarse beds of gray-wacke. The whole system is much intersected by joints, and traversed by large quartz veins f; and has so much the look of an old rock, that it has always been regarded as a regular part of the old slate series of Cornwall. The mineral character, however, as well as the superposition, is sufficiently distinct; and in several places (for example, on the north side of Boscastle) the coarser bands resemble a coal grit, are stained with carbon, and contain many very thin laminae of that substance +. Some of the shales are also calcareous, and contain masses of a variety of rottenstone, like that in the limestone shales of Derbyshire; but none of them contain any fossils resembling those of the older Tintagel slates. Among the higher beds of the series, we have a great development of black, semi-indurated shales; but no true bands of black limestone; and the whole group is violently contorted.
Following this bottom group to the east, along the line of strike, we still find the dark lower shales more or less carbonaceous, and with traces of bright anthracitic laminae; and here and there (though rarely) with obscure traces of vegetable fossils. And along the same line, further east, the siliceous beds become so much expanded as greatly to predominate over the rest, and to give a character to the features of the country. Thus we cross, on the road towards Launceston, great tracts of arid soil resting on gray gritstone, which lies bleaching on the surface, and reminds us of the sterile ridges of a millstone grit country.
Partly in consequence of a thickening of this bottom series, and partly in consequence of a deviation in the strike towards the south, this remarkable deposit of gritstone is carried to the south of Bren Tor ; and from thence, deviating considerably towards the north, and skirting the mining- field of St. Mary Tavy, passes into the high ridge of Black Down, and abuts against Dartmoor. Further towards the north-east, all the bottom grits and shales of the culmiferous system come up to the granite in succession, as may be seen in a traverse from Oakhampton to Tavistock ; and the higher beds of the group then sweep round the northern promontory of the granite.
In this part of their course they are greatly altered in structure, and have even been mistaken for primary rocks. Their changes in structure are, however, due to two causes. 1st. They alternate with many beds of trap, and have their texture greatly changed in consequence. But surely no one will now contend that, on this account, they ought to be cut off from the other culm measures on their strike. 2ndly. When near the granite, the whole system becomes highly metamorphic. Should any one contend that the hard crystalline series between the coarse culm measures south of Oakhampton and the granite of Dartmoor, belong to a distinct group; we may reply, that the hypothesis is contradicted by the strike of the beds, and, above all, by the existence of beds of indurated black shale passing into Lydian stone, and black culmiferous limestone, (incontestably a portion of the true lower culm group, not yet described,) which pass through the heart of this altered group. And we might add, that, in the accidents of stratification, and in the existence of fine seams of Wavellite in the joints of the black indurated shales, we have additional analogies confirming our statement.
The complete demonstration of the general correctness of our views is, however, to be sought on the flanks of the granite hills to the south-west of Oakhampton. A traverse in that direction shows us the successive members of the group we are describing, as they range towards the granite one after another; and each, as it approaches the central rock, is found to undergo an appropriate change. Thus the dark shales put on the form of Lydian stone, and sometimes of compact felspar; and the quartzose bands, under the same conditions, are converted into a hard crystalline quartz rock. Close to the granite, the changes are more complete; the masses become utterly metamorphic, and put oil the form of white compact felspar, micaceous crystalline slate, gneiss, &c. &c. Nor is this all. The granite sends out veins into the altered beds, of which we found an example, not merely in the metamorphic beds of contact, but in a black, indurated shale, at a considerable distance from the junction, in one of the ravines south-west of Oakhampton. Moreover, there is an Elvan dyke (precisely like the Cornish Elvan) still further north, in the central portion of the culm measures, far above the group now under notice.
Phenomena like these, where cause and effect are so clearly brought together, are of no small interest. The metamorphic group is one of the most instructive we have ever examined, inasmuch as we can trace it through all its gradations : and the facts we have stated prove to demonstration, that the granite is not older than the stratified series. And that it is not contemporaneous with the altered group, which is made up of a long series of mechanical deposits, is too obvious to require a proof. There remains, therefore, only one conclusion, (sanctioned by all the changes of position and structure, as well as by the protruded veins,) that the granite in mass is a rock of protrusion, and of a date posterior to the development of, at least, all the lower divisions of the culm measures.
We must now briefly describe the black shales and limestones which form the upper division of our present group, and are, indeed, its most characteristic and important members. These beds have so many characters in common, that the same descriptions will serve, with a few exceptions, for the black limestones both on the north and south side of the great culm trough; and on both lines it is extensively worked in a succession of large open quarries, in several of which are vertical sections more than 100 feet deep.
This upperdivision is regularly bedded, and essentially composed of black carbonaceous shale,traversed by numerous irregular white veins of calc-spar, and alternating with beds of black limestone. The limestone is also filled with white veins ; and being of a rather earthy structure, is only distinguished from the calcareous shale by close inspection. Among the more calcareous bands some are fossiliferous, containing a great abundance of at least two genera of bivalve shells ; one a Posidonia, the other of a genus not ascertained, but regarded, by those who have examined it, as a marine shell. In the same part of the series are Goniatites of at least two species, both of which are unquestionably marine, and (according to Professor Phillips) identical with Goniatites of the Yorkshire coal-field. And there is a negative fact also of great value. This culm limestone contains no fossils resembling those of the groups inferior to the culm series. The beds in question are therefore not more distinguished by their structure from all the calcareous strata of the inferior groups, than they are by their fossils. Yet the black culm-limestones and the calcareous slates of the older system, sometimes range almost side by side. This shows the absolute necessity (whatever may be its age) of mapping the whole culm series by a colour distinct from that of the older slates.
The group we have been describing is of great thickness, and the calcareous portions are several times repeated on the same section ; and not only in the shales, but also among the limestone bands, are thin laminae of culm, but in no instance so thick as to be of economical use. It is difficult to estimate the whole thickness of this portion of the lower culm group, because the beds are repeated by contortions, which in some instances are so violent as to exhibit many salient and re-entering angles like those of a fortification agate. On the whole, however, the limestones and associated black shales plunge away from the older rocks, and gradually disappear under the upper culm-measures. On the south side of the culm-trough, the shales both above and below the black limestone are occasionally used for roofing slate. Thus, on the banks of the Lyd, near Coryton, there is a line of slate quarries apparently under the neighbouring range of the black calcareous rock, which, though excessively contorted on the small scale, (a single bed exhibiting five or six zig-zags in one escarpment,) dips on the whole about magnetic north ; and at Cory Park, immediately over the same contorted limestone, there is a very good striped slate derived from a true cleavage-plane. The beds dip magnetic north 35°, and are cut by fine vertical dip-joints : but the cleavage-planes dip magnetic south about 25° or 30°. Here, again, the cleavage-planes are less inclined than the beds— a phenomenon, perhaps, unknown in the north of England. We observed no beds of like quality in any part of the culmiferous rocks along their northern edge.
We think that the southern calcareous bands are in general thicker than the northern ; but the changes of mineral structure (excepting the meta- morphic portion near the north end of Dartmoor) are more striking on the northern boundary. For example, near Bampton, there are several quarries, where the shales become indurated, have a conchoidal fracture, and a red colour, and sometimes pass into chert; and near the same quarries the calcareous shales are associated with manganese, and the limestone bands are more crystalline, and become of a lighter colour. These localities also exhibit contortions of great complication ; but in that respect they are not anomalous.
Lastly, at Holcombe Rogus, we have a most extraordinary combination of sharp anticlinal ridges and contorted beds of limestone of great thickness, in which the black shale, which generally forms about three-fourths of the escarpments that are worked for lime, has almost disappeared, or at least become quite subordinate.
We were at first doubtful with what rock we were to class the Holcombe Rogus limestone ; but after a second visit in 1836, when we were better acquainted with all the varied characters of the lower culm-measures, we did not hesitate to place it in that part of the series. For it comes within the strike of the culm-measures; and it contains many beds resembling the limestone at Bampton (which is unquestionably a culm-limestone, and may be regarded as a connecting link between the ordinary black limestone and that of Holcombe Rogus). It rests on rotten pale-coloured and red shale, with bands resembling china stone, exactly like some beds on the line of the wavellite rock above described. Again, it alternates with bands of red unctuous shale, (which become indurated and pass into red flagstones.) and with bands of chert; and among its beds in one of the quarries is found a considerable portion of earthy manganese : in all which respects it is analogous to the Bampton limestone! Lastly, in the extreme paucity of its fossils, and their absence from the accompanying shale, as well as from its general structure, it is entirely unlike any of the limestones subordinate to the older group under the culm series*. Hence we think it certain that this limestone is a part of the lower culm group; differing from the other culm-limestones in being much more largely developed, at the expense of the shales and flagstones, and, as a natural consequence, differing also in being more pure and crystalline. It is repeated in six or seven distinct ranges of elevated or contorted beds and anticlinal ridges, within a space of three or four miles in length and breadth. In consequence of these replications, it is difficult to conjecture what is the whole number of its beds or their aggregate thicknessf. In the grand anticlinal ridge (about a mile and a half south of Holcombe Rogus) there is a quarry at Canon Leigh that exposes a face of limestone rock about 150 feet thick: it is composed of a series of very thick, jointed, and shattered beds of a dark grayish blue colour, weatheringlike mountain-limestone, and alternating with thinner bands associated with hard red shale and chert. Among several of the subcrystalline beds we observed what may be considered a characteristic appearance in these quarries, viz. the dissemination of a series of distinct crystals of carbonate of lime through the more earthy base of the rock. It perhaps deserves remark, that among some contorted beds not far from the north end of the canal tunnel, we found some thick amorphous bands of dolomite.
We are aware of the extreme difficulty of conveying a distinct notion of the true aspect of a rock by mere verbal descriptions; but we may certainly say in general terms, that the great escarpments near Holcombe Rogus resemble mountain-limestone. And were we to seek for terms of comparison to describe the ordinary appearance of the black culm limestone (as seen between Bampton and Barnstaple, or along the south boundary of the culm- measures), we might compare it to the black beds of shale limestone in Derbyshire, or to some of the thin-bedded earthy limestones at the bottom of the carboniferous series in Craven ; and more correctly still, to the darker varieties of the Irish calp. But we distinctly wish it to be understood, that we use these terms merely as descriptive, and with no view of prejudging the question respecting the age of the lower culm group.
In consequence of the contortions in this group (more particularly in its upper calcareous shales) it is difficult to form any correct estimate of its average thickness: we think that on the whole it is much thicker on the southern than it is on the northern boundary of the great trough. On both sides of Launceston the group is chiefly increased by the great expansion of the lower grits: and were we to make a transverse section from the lower beds of the whole series on the south side of Bren Tor to the northern limit of the calcareous shales, we must pass, notwithstanding the contortions, through an ascending series which cannot be estimated at less than two or three thousand feet in thickness, and is we think considerably more.
This group, essentially composed of sandstone and indurated shale, is expanded through all the undescribed portions of the great culm trough, and indeed occupies nine-tenths of its whole surface. It is of very great, but unascertained, thickness; being perpetually interrupted, coiled upon itself, and repeated over again, by violent contortions, forming an incredible number of anticlinal and synclinal lines, ranging nearly east and west with the strike of the beds. No words can exaggerate the number and violence of these contortions—sometimes in regular undulating curves—sometimes in curves broken at their points of contrary flexure, and exhibiting a succession of cusps, like regular pointed arches—sometimes, though more rarely, thrown into salient and re-entering angles, generally of local extent and only affecting particular beds. Indeed, we have some examples of such angles in thick beds of shale, where the massy sandstones, above and below them, are not at all contorted.
These contortions become less violentas we approach the lower groups on the southern and northern outskirts of the formation. Thus, on leaving the lower group near Oakhampton and making a traverse towards the north, we cross, for some miles, a great ascending series of the upper culm group, in which the prevailing dip is north, and in which there are comparatively few undulations. And in like manner, in a traverse from the northern boundary (for example along either of the roads from Barnstaple to Bideford), we have a great ascending series of beds, and a prevailing dip to the south. Hence, though it be impossible to ascertain the whole thickness of the group, we are sure that it is very great; and respecting the general order of superposition we find no difficulty. Whatever may be the age of the upper culm series, it is uncontestably the highest group of our general north and south sections;};.
We have stated that the essential components of this group are sandstone and shale; sometimes exhibited in numerous thin bands, sometimes in thick well-defined masses. The sandstones are generally close grained, and full of irregular joints; and are coated over with ferruginous stains, exactly like bands of coal-grit. They are often gray, or brownish gray, and sometimes gre'enisli gray, and are occasionally stained by red ha?matitic joints. And on the north side of Portledge Bay there is a series of sandstones and alternating shales of a deep red colour, which produce a distinct feature in the county, and may be traced for many miles along the strike, all the way preserving their peculiar mineral character.
The system is traversed here and there by quartz veins, sometimes passing in well-defined transverse lines, and sometimes reticulated through the whole mass of the rock. Many of the thick gray beds exhibit, on their weathered and water-worn surfaces in the sea cliff, a number of spherical light-coloured spots, indicating an approach to a concretionary structure. Specks of silvery mica are disseminated through many of the masses, on lines parallel to the bedding; and sometimes the mineral becomes so abundant that the rock has a flaggy structure, and resembles the coarse flagstone, so commonly used as a roofing slate in all our coal countries. The thinner beds alternate with, and pass into, a laminated arenaceous shale, with fine ripple marks at the partings. This last variety is sometimes (for example, on the coast of Bideford Bay, south of the Popple Bank,) continued through a thickness of many hundred feet; with hardly an interruption from the thick hard coarser beds of sandstone.
The shales vary from a sandy, micaceous, laminated flagstone, to a soft slate-clay, not distinguishable from a common shale of our true coal-measures. Sometimes they exfoliate into innumerable thin flakes; sometimes their weathered surfaces decompose into thin transverse prismatic masses, like the forms of starch. Many of them are pyritous, and are coated superficially with a white efflorescence or with brown ferruginous stains, precisely in these respects resembling coal shales. Among them are, here and there, dark carbonaceous bands which stain the fingers, generally in the form of mere laminm ; and near the junction of the shales with the harder flagstones, the dark laminae often contain innumerable obscure vegetable impressions much discoloured by decomposing pyrites: occasionally, but more rarely, the dark shales contain glossy plates, having the lustre of plumbago, in which case they seem to pass into the state of culm. The best examples of these glossy plates are, however, seen in the shales of the lower culm group already described.
Impressions of plants are also found occasionally among the strong beds of sandstone; for example, in a quarry by the road-side about half-way between Barnstaple and Bideford. In Ugbrook Park, near Chudleigh, there is a large development of culm sandstone as coarse as millstone grit, and passing into a conglomerate form ; and over it are some beds of more thin-bedded, gray sandstone, not to be distinguished from a coal-measure sandstone, and containing very fine vegetable impressions, among which are well-marked Calamites. Indeed, through the whole of the upper group we are describing, vegetable impressions, though rarely so perfect as to give anything like specific characters, are extremely abundant.
Nodules of clay-ironstone are occasionally associated with the hard beds of sandstone; and sometimes they occur in beds, or rows, subordinate to the shaly bands. Among the accidental beds we may also notice calcareous shale passing into thin, impure bands of limestone, of which we saw an example near Hatherleighf. All the beds above described are intersected by numerous open joints, which in the coarser contorted beds are very irregular in their directions. But when the beds have a finer flaggy or shaly structure, the joints often become parallel, (especially in a direction nearly transverse to the strike) so as to separate the strata into prismatic masses.
The description above given of the culm-measures, is copied from memoranda made on the spot during our traverses through the formation. The prevailing characters of the formation are the same throughout, and with very few exceptions (which occur chiefly in the metamorphic portions), there is no difficulty in identifying it by its mineral characters alone. Its dark colour, the imperfect induration of the shale beds, the absence of slaty cleavage, the coarse mechanical nature of the bands of sandstone, and the perpetually recurring contortions, enabled us to follow it throughout, to trace it round the N.E. flank of Dartmoor, and to make out the boundaries of certain outliers of it which occur near Newton Bushel. And when we combine with these characters the very frequent occurrence of vegetable fossils, we can seldom fail to make out the place and limits of the deposit among the older rocks of Devonshire.
There are other appearances in the very external aspect of the county to help us in determining the superficial extent of the culm series. The continued undulations of the whole region, where the contorted strata are expanded in a numberless succession of ridges, prolonged east and west like the anticlinal and synclinal lines of the inferior strata—the great extent of a yellow, sterile, and, we believe, pyritous clay, producing a cold, fruitless soil, exactly like that among the cold lands of our coal-measures —these characters often enable us, at a glance, to separate this formation from all the other deposits of the country.
Such are the prevailing characters of the two groups into which we have divided the culmiferous series; and such are the prevailing characters of the subordinate parts : and whatever may be their place in the general scale of British formations, this at least is certain,—that they are more recent than any of the other deposits, described in our transverse section, from the north to the south coast of Devon, and that they are overlaid by no rocks older than the new red sandstone. So far we may state our grounds of conviction with unlimited confidence. Neither can they be classed with any of the other formations with which they are associated; as has, we think, been sufficiently proved in the previous portions of this paper. But in approaching the definite question—what is the exact epoch of the culm-measures ?—we must fortify ourselves with some more specific evidence, which might indeed have been incorporated in the preceding general description, but which we have deferred to this place, in order that the facts it offers might appear in a more prominent form.
In addition, then, to the thin carbonaceous bands above noticed, there are, on the coast near Bideford, and extending from thence along the line of strike far into the interior of the county, some much thicker bands of culm, which have for many years been extensively worked. This fact was known by all persons who had examined the structure of North Devon; but we believe Mr. De la Beche was the first who made the Society acquainted with vegetable fossils, derived from these localities, sufficiently well marked to admit of a botanical description or comparison with the vegetable fossils of other formations.
Near the coast, the culm appears to have been worked on two lines very near each other; and on the north side of the culm beds is a very ferruginous grit in a highly-inclined position, and exactly parallel to the culmiferous shales. When we visited the coast during the past summer (1836), they were extracting no culm for domestic use; but were working one pit, sunk, we believe, on the southern line of culm, for the sake of a highly carbonaceous and unctuous shale, which runs side by side with a thin band of pure culm, and is extensively sold as a black pigment.
The same culm beds have been traced eastward through the S.W. end of Bideford ; and they were formerly much worked there in pits which are now deserted. About two miles to the east of the town there have also been very extensive works, which were partially re-opened last summer (1836), but with what success we have not heard. At that place, there are three highly- inclined beds of culm, designated by the names of south, middle, and north veins,—all of which dip south.
The south vein, or paint vein, is about three feet wide, and on its north side is a carbonaceous shale, used for paint. The whole bed is very impure, and contains little good culm fit for burning.
The middle vein is fifteen fathoms north of the former, and is about four feet thick on the average, but expands, in some places, to twenty feet, and in.others is pinched out to a few inches, the culm appearing here (precisely as in the contorted culmiferous strata of Pembrokeshire) in large spheroidal masses, much shattered and broken, as if they had undergone irregular compression among the contorted beds of sandstone. Some parts of this bed are very good for domestic use.
The north vein is forty fathoms north of the preceding. It is two feet wide on the average, and is liable to similar variations with the middle vein ; and it has been much worked, though it is not of so good a quality as the former.
The pit we examined was sinking on the south side of the middle vein. The sole of all the culm beds is sandstone., rather close-grained., and in some places ferruginous ; and the roof is composed of indurated shale (called shil- lat) : but in the middle vein the shale roof sometimes passes into a gray micaceous flagstone, mixed and stained with glossy culm, and is exactly like a grit of the culm measures of Pembrokeshire. Plants are found in all these overlying shales; and carbonaceous impressions  occur also in the sandstones.
These mineral details are copied, word for word, from our memorandums made on the spot, and are enough for our present purpose. It only remains for us to give a list of the fossil plants, many of which are now before the Society.

In addition to these plants clearly exhibiting the characters on which fossil species are determined, there is a considerable quantity of impressions of coarse, sedge-like, or grassy vegetables, which, though not easily defined, are apparently identical with fragments very common in the Pembrokeshire coal-field. We would here also call attention to the fact, that every species of these Devon plants which is well preserved has at once been identified by Professor Lindley with well-known and previously-published vegetable forms of the true carboniferous era. Among these, the Pecopteris lonchitica and Neuropteris cordata may safely be cited as among the most common and characteristic plants of nearly all the European coal-fields.
On the whole, considering that the culmiferous rocks of Devon form a distinct group, with a peculiar mineral type (unlike the older groups, but nearly resembling the culmiferous beds of Pembrokeshire)—that they overlie ail the other groups, and are overlaid by no rock newer than the new red sandstone—that, notwithstanding the paucity of fossils in the black limestone (in which respect it resembles the calp of Ireland), there are in it one or two species not separable from known mountain-limestone fossils,—and, finally, that the flora of the upper culms, as far as it has been ascertained, agrees specifically with the known flora of the carboniferous period; we think we have strong direct evidence to establish our position, “ that the upper culm strata of Devon are the geological equivalents of the ordinary British coal-fields.” Our conclusion is drawn from direct evidence, and can only be assailed by direct conflicting evidence, of which we have not yet discovered any trace.
Besides the plants of the strata which we refer to the true carboniferous serie», other fossil vegetables have been discovered since our first visit to Devonshire, in the sandstone beds of Sloly quarries, north of Barnstaple, which are near the base of the fifth group of our North Devon section; and, therefore, far below the culmiferous series.
This discovery was first communicated to us by Maior Hardinp of Ilfracombe, to whose exertions we have already alluded. He forwarded to us, several months since, a few stems of plants from Sloly quarries, accompanied by casts of shells from the sandstone rocks of Marwood ; and had this memoir not been unavoidably retarded, we should have announced his discovery at the commencement of the year. Meanwhile, however, the Rev. D. Williams having revisited the same locality, has procured a more abundant and perfect supply of fossil plants from it, which he has sent to the Geological Society to illustrate a memoir of his own; and he has kindly permitted us to examine them. On referring these plants to Professor Lindley, we were favoured by him with the following opinion :—
“ I am of opinion that these remains are not susceptible of specific identification; you can only approximate to their determination : 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, are probably portions of the same species, and are undoubtedly a Stigmaria or a Lepidodendron; the absence of all trace of a hollow axis, and the similarity of their surface to that of decorticated Lepidodendra, induce me to decide for the latter.
Is probably another portion of the same plant; but this is uncertain.
Is more analogous to some states of Sternbergia than to any other fossil I am acquainted with. It agrees with that genus remarkably in the intermixture of strong longitudinal fibres and coarse cellular substance; and at all events may be safely considered as the remains of some arborescent Moncolyledon.
Is so imperfect that it is hardly safe to refer it to Calamites; and yet the apparent obliquity of the only articulation that the specimen exhibits, is so much that of Calamites Vollzii of Ad. Brongniart, as to render it probable that it may belong even to that species.
Has on one side the evident impression of a Lepidodendron; on the other side it is striated like Calamites arenaceus ? perhaps it was the latter moulded on one side upon the stem of the former.
Was possibly a portion of No. 7, with the cortical integument less decayed ; on the lower left hand side, quite at the edge, is a small part of the surface, which will nearly match a part of No. 7.
If these conjectures are correct, the whole of the specimens are referable to genera of the coal measures ; but whether they are specifically the same, I cannot say.”
Such are the remarks of Professor Lindley on the fossil plants of Sloly quarries ; and we contend that they oppose no real difficulties to our previous conclusions respecting tlje age of the culm beds. Should true coal plants be discovered in the lower group (North Devon, section No. 1), they would not, we think, upset conclusions founded on so much direct evidence. They would, however, prove one of two things—either that such plants had an unusually wide geological range; or that the group below the culm measures was of a more recent date than we first imagined; and formed (as has indeed been supposed from the evidence of sections) a true passage into the lower division of the overlying trough. The only fact which could materially disturb our proposed classification, w ould be the discovery of a series of plants among the culm beds, unlike the fossil flora of the true coal-fields, and resembling the fossil flora of some well-ascertained lower formation. But such a series never has been, and we believe never will be, discovered in Devonshire.
The culm series, considered as a whole, cannot be properly classed with the inferior groups ; as it has a distinct position, a different structure, and a peculiar suit of organic fossils, animal as well as vegetable. It must therefore be represented, hereafter, on our geological maps by, at least, one distinct colour. So far we conclude with perfect confidence.
The enormous development of this series, the absence of the old red sandstone and mountain-limestone in their more usual form, and the fine slate rocks in some parts of the lower culm group, may seem to make its geological base somewhat doubtful. Again, the parallelism of position of the lower group and the formations on which it rests (both on the north and the south sides of the great trough), and its apparent passage into them, tend to increase this doubt. Provisionally, then, and as a measure of caution, we are willing to place the base line of the culm series in a geological position, not yet perfectly defined. But, we repeat, no such ambiguity attaches to the upper part of the culm series; as all the vegetable fossils derived from it, are identical with published species, before obtained, from the true coal measures overlying the mill-stone grit.
Again, as the members of the whole culmiferous series (including both the upper and lower divisions) appear to have originated in one uninterrupted succession of operations, have a nearly common type, and partake of the same accidents, we certainly think that they must all be classed together. And if this reasoning be correct, the lower groups of black shale and limestone (whatever be the supposed ambiguity of the base line) must also be classed with the true carboniferous system. In its structure and in the paucity of its organic remains, it resembles the calp, or argillaceous limestone, at the base of the carboniferous system of Ireland ; and the specific characters of its fossils, as far as they go, do not invalidate but confirm the conclusion we have drawn.

It only remains for us to describe in a few words, the Dartmoor granite and the phenomena presented at its junction with the other stratified formations :—
1st. It presents the large porphyritic structure, the contemporaneous crystalline portions, and veins of schorl; the portions liable to decomposition from the disappearance of the alkaline constituent of the felspar ; the hemitrope crystals of albite; and in short, almost all the other well-known accidents of structure, which have so often been remarked in the Cornish granite. Indeed, there can be no doubt, that, from Dartmoor to Land’s End, all the larger protuberances of granite belong to one common system of formation ; and they present the like phenomena at their junction with the stratified rocks.
2nd. There are other accidents of structure, common to the granite of Devonshire and Cornwall, which we may also notice—more especially the joints. Every one who had written on the granite of these counties, had noticed the occasional prismatic, or cuboidal, forms of the rock; and Dr. McCulloch endeavoured to account for these phenomena on the hypothesis of interfering spheroidal concretions. Since that time, Mr. Fox and Mr. Enys have shown, that two leading sets of these joints are nearly perpendicular to the horizon ; and have (in the western parts of Cornwall) given bearings with respect to the points of the compass,—one set being nearly magnetic N. and S., and the other nearly magnetic E. and W. ; while a third set are nearly horizontal*. Nor did their remarks end here; for they showed, by the peculiarities of its cleavage, and the prevalent arrangement of the larger felspar crystals, that these joints were due to a crystalline arrangement affecting the whole mass of the granite. These arrangements, however, fail on the outskirts of the granite ; more especially in the deviation of the tabular joints, which, in such cases, often assume a kind of dome-like shape, conforming rudely to the actual surface of the country. Dr. Boase has also dwelt largely on these subjects, and shown that many of the accidents of structure, especially many master-joints, are common to the granite and the rocks in contact with it.
Now all these important peculiarities of structure (first observed in the western parts of Cornwall) are equally true of the granite and contiguous rocks of Dartmoor.
The leading system of joints is the same with that observed in Cornwall, whether we examine the granite or the altered rocks that are close to it. This remark applies to the culm measures, as well as to the older slates; and the fact seems to show, that the joints (common to the granite and contiguous slates) must be contemporaneous. But it by no means follows from this conclusion, that we should thence infer, as has been done by Dr. Boase, that the granite and the contiguous slate rocks are also contemporaneous. Such a conclusion is manifestly contradicted by the facts stated in the preceding parts of our paper.
3rd. Granite veins, passing from the central mass into the superimposed stratified rocks, are found on all sides of Dartmoor. We have seen them above Ivy Bridge, injected among the oldest slates of Devonshire ; and near Oak- hampton, we have seen them in like manner, penetrating the culm measures : and they are finely exposed in the beautiful gorges of the Teign and the Dart, where those rivers descend from the granite to the culmiferous series. These examples, to which we could add many more, are sufficient for our purpose. Now these veins, taken in general, are mere prolongations of the central granite, inseparable from it, and contemporaneous with it; they cannot therefore (as the granite is one mass) be contemporaneous with stratified rocks of different ages. Consequently they are true veins of injection, and the granite was protruded at a time, posterior to all the other stratified systems.
Again, the beds and masses of trap, associated with the stratified rocks, do not penetrate the granite (as they do in the Isle of Arran and many other places) but are uniformly cut off by it. This seems to prove that the injected trappean masses obtained their present position among the slates before the granite existed in its present form ; and the same conclusion is still more certain when applied to the stratified, or recomposed, trappean rocks which alternate with the slates.
4th. The strata round Dartmoor are not all mantle-shaped. On the northwestern and north-eastern sides of it, their strike is not much altered by the granite; and the successive beds may be said to abut against, rather than mantle round the central rock : yet the ends of these abutting strata are perfectly metamorphic. This fact we think important, as it proves to demonstration, that these strata are, in the strictest sense, metamorphic, and do not belong, as has been supposed, to a system of deposits older than the less crystalline beds, which are further from the granite.
5th. There have been two distinct regions of elevation in the country above described; one commencing in the great granitic mass of Dartmoor and extending into Cornwall,—the other, nearly parallel to, and not far from, the north coast of Devonshire. The compression of the central mass in North Devon, by the elevation and protrusion of the rocks on these two lines, may perhaps have been among the means which produced the contortions of the great culm-trough.
6th. Lastly, as a general conclusion from all the previous details, it appears that the rocks of Devon and Cornwall belong to three periods of formation. The oldest includes the various groups of slate rocks, and, at least, a part of the associated traps. The next includes the culm series, the upper division of which contains fossils identical with those in the upper division of the true coal measures. The granite belongs to the newest period ; but (on evidence not discussed in this paper) probably assumed its present position among the rocks above described, before the deposit of the new red sandstone.


