Introduction.
IN two papers read before the Geological Society during the Sessions of the past year1, 1 endeavoured to describe the phenomena exhibited along the line where the carboniferous chain of Yorkshire and Westmoreland strikes against the old slate rocks of the Cumbrian mountains. Taking up the subject where it had been left by Mr. Phillipsf, a series of enormous faults and dislocations were traced, nearly along this line of junction, to the foot of Stainmoor; and it was shown that mountain masses of rock, torn off from the carboniferous series, were thrown down with a reversed dip into the higher part of the valley of the Eden, near Kirkby Stephen; and that after many breaks and contortions, they gradually gained a more regular strike and dip, and were prolonged into a chain, forming the northern outskirt of the primary Cumbrian system, and terminating at Egremont. It was at the same time shown that another fault, ranging under the escarpment of the Cross Fell chain, produced a corresponding effect on that part of the carboniferous series; and that both these great disruptions took place at a period anterior to a portion of the conglomerates of the new red sandstone
In this paper I purpose to give a sketch of the new red sandstone series, which spreads from both banks of the Eden to the base of the neighbouring mountains, and afterwards skirts the coasts of Cumberland and Low Furness. In performing this task I shall endeavour to describe in order,
1st, The geographical distribution of the red sandstone series, and the features of the country through which it ranges ;
2ndly, Two or three masses of older rock, which appear within the limits of the red sandstone ;
3rdly, The successive deposits entering into the red sandstone series, with a view to their comparison with the corresponding groups in Yorkshire and Durham;
4thly, By way of conclusion, I shall endeavour to give a general comparison of the red sandstone series of Scotland and England, in the hopes of thereby establishing some general subdivisions, by help of which the several groups may be brought into at least an approximate comparison with each other.
The details of this, and of the two other papers, will nearly define the geographical limits of the primary Cumbrian mountains, a general description of which I hope in a short time to lay before the Society.
§ 1. Geographical distribution of the Red Sandstone Series.
Between the chain of Cross Fell and the primary Cumbrian mountains the red sandstone series fills a triangular area, the vertex of which may be placed in one of the tributaries of the river Eden, not far from Brough, and its base on the frontier of Dumfriesshire and the Solway Firth. Respecting the range of the north-eastern side of this triangular area, I have few details to offer which are worth recording; but I may state in general terms, that if the vertex be placed on the banks of the Belah (above the bridge on the road from Brough to Kirkby Stephen), the boundary line may thence be drawn, by Brough Castle and the north-eastern side of Brough Hill, to the foot of the carboniferous chain a little above Helton ; and that in the remaining part of its course to the frontier of Scotland, it continues to skirt the chain very nearly, as is represented in Mr. Greenough’s map.	
The direction of the south-western boundary has been ascertained much more correctly, by observations carried on from one end of it to the other. Its minute description is, however, thrown into an appendix, being necessarily made up of details, which, though tiresome and uninstructive if read before the Society, may assist in the completion of our geological maps, and be of some value as matters of reference. Such facts only will be mentioned here, as throw light on the structure of the red sandstone, and help to establish its subdivisions.
Where the red sandstone series first appears in the ramifications of the Eden, near Brough and Kirkby Stephen, it is chiefly seen as a conglomerate, abounding in fragments of mountain limestone, and cannot, when it has that form, be mineralogically distinguished from the overlying conglomerates on the skirts of the Mendip Hills. It is generally in a state of complete induration where the calcareous fragments abound; and it sometimes passes into mere brecciated beds of limestone : but other parts, especially where the pebbles are rounded, and the sand and cement abundant, are soft and crumbling. In the arrangement of the several varieties of the formations, though the beds are nearly horizontal, there is very little approach to symmetry or order. Hence the conglomerates offer a very unequal resistance to the action of the elements ; and above Kirkby Stephen, where the Eden makes its way through them, they have been worn into channels of extraordinary complexity. Chasms and deep basins are naturally scooped out where the rock offers the least resistance ; and by these inequalities great eddies are formed in the river during every mountain flood, which by whirling round the hard pebbles at the bottom of each basin, gradually grind away the solid rock, and carry on the work of excavation far below the surface. Caverns are thus formed; and masses of conglomerate become so far undermined, as sometimes to allow a new passage to the river far below the level where it once flowed.
A fine example of this kind occurs at Stenkreth Bridge near Kirkby Stephen, where the waters, after washing the inclined strata of mountain limestone below Pendragon Castle, plunge among the horizontal masses of conglomerate ; after which, for a short space, they are heard roaring in a subterranean channel, communicating by a narrow cleft (called the span of the Eden) with what appears to have been the ancient bed of the river. Within the memory of man this cleft might be spanned by the human hand; but it is now, by an act of wanton mutilation, despoiled of a portion of its honours, so that the projecting ledges of rock, at their nearest point of approach, are about two feet asunder.
A little way below Kirkby Stephen the conglomerates are in a state of extreme induration, and rise in large flat beds, sometimes used for coarse flagstones and coping-stones, a purpose to which the conglomerates of the new red sandstone are also applied in the neighbourhood of the Mendip Hills.
The relations of the overlying series are extremely obscure for several miles below Brough and Kirkby Stephen, being much concealed by enormous masses of transported materials. The new red sandstone is however seen, in several places, in the channel of the Eden, and the line of demarcation passes, on the whole, considerably to the south of its left bank*. In the rivulet which descends to Little Ormside, and at Burrels, to the south of Appleby, the conglomerates are again exposed; and (though the sections are obscure) appear, from their position, to be at the base of the red sandstone seriesf. Near Burrels they form a fine escarpment, parts of which contain large fragments of mountain limestone (sometimes rounded but generally angular) and are extensively burnt in the neighbouring kilns: other parts of the escarpment are of a finer structure, rise in thick flaggy beds, and are used for building. The imbedded pebbles and fragments of gritstone and limestone seem to be derived exclusively from the neighbouring carboniferous formations; and are held together by a red, calcareo-ferruginous cement, more or less mixed with siliceous sand, and in a very variable state of induration. Subordinate to the cement (which does not, as in some parts of England, contain an excess of magnesia) are a few concretionary nodules of red oxide of iron.
The range of the demarcation through the remaining part of Westmoreland, till it crosses the Eamont below Eamont bridge, presents no phaenomena of much interest. It, however, deserves remark, that in this district, especially near Cliburn, the red sandstone is sufficiently hard and thin-bedded to be used for roofing-slate. In England such a structure must be considered rare; but in Dumfriesshire the new red sandstone not unusually rises in flaggy beds which are, I believe, sometimes applied to a similar purpose.
The further range, to the coast of Cumberland, is detailed in the Appendix (p. 405); and it is sufficient in this place to state, that the line of demarcation incloses Penrith Beacon, Thiefside Fell, and the great quarries of Highhead Castle ; and that, after skirting the Bolton coal field, it stretches in a direction nearly east and west, and runs into the sea on the south side of Maryport. Along th is line there are no traces of conglomerates (like those above described) ; nor, in general, is there anything in the position of the red sandstone beds to prove that they are unconformable to the carboniferous beds on which they rest*. They make no regular escarpment, and there is moreover a difficulty in determining their exact limits, of which those who have only studied the types of our south-western coal fields can hardly form a just estimate. The gritstone beds of the carboniferous series are, here and there, of a deep red colour, and cannot always be distinguished from the new red sandstone. Moreover there seem to be, along some portions of this line, traces of a lower red sandstone, forming a connecting link between the true carboniferous rocks and the formation am now describing.
Between the south-western boundary of the new red sandstone and the banks of the Eden, there are many tracts of wild sterile land. For the rich gypseous marls, which give so much fertility to the great plain of central England, are there almost entirely wanting; and the subsoil is composed of a barren sandstone, on the parallel, if I mistake not, of the forest sand of Nottinghamshire. This sandstone has been exposed to great degradations since the time of its first deposit; but by taking the height of Penrith Beacon, and adding to it the depth of the borings in search of coal, near its base, we have a proof that the portions of red sandstone, still remaining, are in some places of a very great aggregate thickness.
The great degradation of the red sandstone is proved, not only by the outline of the country, but also by the enormous masses of drifted materials by which it is accompanied. It is no part of my object to describe these materials in detail; but I may here remark, that mingled with them, and overlying them, are great bowlders of Shap granite, which have been drifted over the hills and plains skirting the Eden from Appleby to the foot of Stainmoor; that enormous masses of Carrock Fell syenite and other crystalline Cumbrian rocks have been drifted as far as the shores of the Solway Firth, where they are found mixed with other great bowlders, brought by opposite currents from the mountains of Dumfriesshire ; and lastly, that the red sandstone is often buried, for miles together, under great heaps of the old alluvial detritus, which has modified all the external features of the region, and sometimes produced a fertility little known where the undisturbed rock is near the surface.
From the red cliffs of Maryport to St. Bees Head (a distance of thirteen or fourteen miles, estimated in a straight line), the whole coast is occupied by the coal measures, excepting one place a little north of Workington, and two or three places near Whitehaven, where we find an intermediate sandstone, forming, apparently, a connecting link between the true carboniferous and new red sandstone groups. The red sandstone of St. Bees Head appears to dip conformably to the coal measures, from which it is separated, not only by the intermediate sandstone before noticed, hut also by the magnesian limestone and conglomerate which strike across the headland to Ben How quarry f, where they are cut oft’ by the valley of St. Bees, to the south of which the yellow- limestone is no more seen in Cumberland.
Notwithstanding the position of the beds at St. Bees Head, it is obvious that, when considered on a great scale, the formation is unconformable to the coal series; for the same beds, in their prolongation to Egremont, cross obliquely over the range of the mountain limestone, and the new red sandstone is expanded in irregular outliers far within the limits of the coal field j;.
Between Egremont and Gossforth, the formation appears to have undergone a movement of elevation ; for its beds dip at a considerable angle to the west series; and, in the long range from Appleby to Maryport, there are few places where the two formations can be shown, by their dip or inclination, to be in an unconformable position.

§ 2. On some detached Masses of the Carboniferous Series within the area of the New Red Sandstone.
There may be three causes to account for the appearance of such masses: 1st, When the chain of Cross Fell was severed (by the great dislocation above noticed), from the carboniferous chain now forming the outskirts of the primary Cumbrian system, it seems probable (independently of direct evidence), that some large dislocated masses of rock would be left in the intervening area which is now generally covered with the new red sandstone. 2ndly, The red sandstone may, when first deposited, have been of a very irregular thickness, and in some places may have left the inferior rocks partially uncovered. 3rdly, The protruding masses of the older rocks may have been laid bare by the great denudations already mentioned. To one or more of these causes we may attribute the appearance of the detached portions of the carboniferous series I am about to notice.
The first example occurs near the middle of Broadfield (once a wild heathy tract of land, but now inclosed), about six miles due south of Carlisle, and about a mile and a half east-south-east of the village of Gatesgill. Close to the meeting of four roads, fine contorted masses of mountain limestone are exposed in three quarries, two on the east side of the Penrith road, and one 
on the west. In the two eastern quarries we have fine thick beds of mountain limestone, some dipping south-south-east, and others nearly perpendicular, surmounted by several impure beds, which will not burn to lime, and by about fifteen feet of gravel, tinged red with fragments of the new red sandstone. In the western quarry the dip is about north-north-east. At one end of it the limestone is more than twenty feet thick ; but it thins off, at the other end, to about half that thickness. This mass is associated with a white freestone, and with an impure, ferruginous, encrinite limestone unfit for use. Some purple-coloured shale and siliceous gritstone, laid bare in a small excavation about half a mile south-west of these quarries, appear also to belong to the carboniferous series ; but how far they are expanded over the plateau of Broad- field, it would be no easy matter to determine, in the present concealed state of the country. In the valleys of lvegill and Raw Beck, to the south and east of Broadfield, there are, however, very fine escarpments of new red sandstone.
The next example is seen in Chalk Beck, about a mile north-east of Rosley, and three quarters of a mile above Chalk Foot. On the right bank of the rivulet there is an escarpment of limestone between 20 and 30 feet thick, surmounted by 30 or 40 feet of red diluvial gravel. Close to this escarpment are beds of new red sandstone, partly resting upon the limestone, and partly separated from it by thin beds of conglomerate containing angular fragments of limestone. In such a position it might easily be mistaken for a portion of the formation of magnesian limestone, especially as some of the beds are earthy and cellular; and all of them are yellow, and contain magnesia. It, however, on the whole, more resembles the dolomitic varieties of mountain limestone; and it dips slightly to east by south, while the nearest beds of red sandstone dip north-north-west. Moreover, it contains Orthoceratites, beautiful corals of the genus Caryophyllia, resembling species well known in the mountain limestone, and large Product®, among which, if I mistake not, is the Producta Scotica; but it does not contain any characteristic fossil of the magnesian limestone formation. On these accounts I do not hesitate to class it with the outlying rocks of Broadfield, which are undoubtedly of the carboniferous order.
The last instance which fell under my notice, of any outlying portion of the carboniferous rocks within the area of the new red sandstone, occurs near the village of Aketon, about four miles north of Wig-ton. Some of the neighbouring country is much covered by ancient turf bog and a peculiar sandy alluvion ; but to the north of the village some beds of limestone and shale are laid bare on both sides of the road; and if I have not been misinformed, a bed of coal 16 inches thick was proved, by boring, to be associated with them, at a place called Moor Dyke, on the west side of the road. I mention these facts in the hopes of calling to them the attention of future observers; for I know of no place within the limits of the red sandstone, where a search for coal could be commenced with the same prospect of success. My knowledge of the central portions of that great area, within the basin of the Eden, which is chiefly covered by the new red sandstone, is, however, extremely limited. My examination of Cumberland was chiefly confined to the carboniferous rocks and the central cluster of mountains; and whenever, in making a traverse, I was led to the edge of the new red sandstone, I generally considered my immediate labours at an end.
§ 3. On the successive Deposits ivhich compose the New Red Sandstone Series, fyc.
The preceding details give a general notion of the distribution of the new- red sandstone series within the basin of the Eden, and on a part of the coasts of Cumberland and Lancashire ; but they give only a very inadequate indication of the structure and order of those great mineral masses of which it is composed. This information is, however, conveyed in a much more perfect manner by the coast section, from Parton to St. Bees Head, which I now proceed to describe.
The rich coal field of Whitehaven, constituting that part of the carboniferous series which is superior to the millstone grit and mountain limestone, may be separated into two divisions, the upper containing the great main and bannock bands, the lower containing four or five workable beds, but of inferior quality. The united thickness of these two divisions is, perhaps, not less than two thousand feet; and from this estimate the carboniferous limestone and its associated beds are of course excluded. The upper beds are worked in a small field on the coast, immediately south of Workington ; but in consequence of an enormous upcast fault they are thrown out, and the lower division is brought into the cliff, and occupies an extensive plateau stretching from Harrington to the hills north of Morresby, about two miles and a half from the harbour of Whitehaven. Near the crown of these hills (and about a mile from the point where the accompanying section commences) another great fault, producing a downcast to the south-west, probably of not less than a thousand feet, once more brings in the upper rich division of the coal field. Unfortunately, however, between this fault and the village of Parton, the beds dip to the east; so that all those which are below the high-water mark necessarily crop out under the sea. The result is, that no one has been able to extract the coal, in consequence of the great quantity of sea water which finds its way through the beds along their planes of dip.
At Parton there are other considerable dislocations, not merely altering the relative level of the beds, but again producing a reversed dip, by which the whole series of coal measures, as well as all the overlying groups extending to St. Bees Head, are made to plunge to the south-west at a small angle of inclination. The successive strata, therefore, after this last inversion of dip, have their outcrop in the interior of the country; and the coal seams are perfectly protected from the sea water by the impervious overlying beds of shale.
Such is the position of the submarine portion of the coal field of Whitehaven ; and it does not seem possible to assign any limit to the works that may there be conducted under the sea in the direction of the dip. But it is foreign to my purpose to give any description of these works, as the preceding remarks are introduced for the sole purpose of explaining the nature of the base line on which the accompanying section is constructed.
The north-eastern extremity of this section commences at Parton, among some broken and contorted beds. The confused ground extends about 150 yards, after which the beds acquire their regular south-western dip above described. Following the coast towards Whitehaven, we find the cliff composed of shale and sandstone, which, after being continued several hundred yards, is suddenly cut off by a downcast fault, of 24 fathoms, to the south-westf. From this point to the north end of Whitehaven, we find an uninterrupted rock of coarse sandstone (resembling many well-known varieties of millstone grit), generally of a gray or brownish gray colour, but here and there with stains and streaks of red. Parts of the rock are of a very strong texture, and have been extensively quarried for the new piers at Whitehaven. It has also been cut through by the old tunnel between Whitehaven and Parton, as well as by a new tunnel, now excavating for the purpose of a ready communication with the hills west of Dissington, where the main coal seam is about to be worked. Its structure is therefore very well exposed.
Close to the north end of Whitehaven comes in another fault, producing a downcast to the north-east, of eleven fathoms ; but if we follow this fault into the interior, the quantity of dislocation produced by it is enormously increased. By this and two other faults, elevating the strata in the same direction, we may explain the high position of the quarry sandstone in the hills immediately south of the town. At Saltom, as is seen in the section, are two faults, producing downcasts in opposite directions: their joint effect is to bring the great sandstone once more to the level of the sea, after which it is continued nearly a mile in a lofty cliff; and its component beds are carried by their dip (with the interruption of one fault) in regular succession towards the base of St. Bees Head.
The general character of this sandstone is the same as in the tunnel cliff, north of Whitehaven ; but it is of a much redder colour, contains many small ferruginous nodules, and in mineral character is perfectly identical with many portions of that peculiar red sandstone which separates the Yorkshire coal measures from the magnesian limestone. It is generally without any trace of fossils : the very extensive excavations carried on in it on both sides of Whitehaven, havej however, brought to light a few obscure impressions of Equiseta and Calamites. It makes, therefore, a very near approach to a true coal grit; and in the surveys hitherto published, as well as in the estimation of the coal viewers of the neighbourhood, it has, I believe, always been regarded as a true member of the coal measures.
Under Barrowmouth this sandstone is surmounted by a conglomerate, exactly like the magnesian conglomerates of our south-western coal fields, but only two or three feet in thickness. Its lower part is of a reddish colour, and contains, among other fragments, rolled masses of mountain limestone mixed with hydrate of iron. The upper parts of it have a calcareo-magnesian cement; and it is surmounted by, or rather graduates into, a yellow, foliated, cellular, magnesian limestone. This limestone is not well exposed at the sea-side, being almost buried under the overlying red marls; but some of its upper beds are mixed and striated with red ferruginous matter, and seem to pass into a singular, red, siliceous sandstone containing jasper and chalcedony. It is, however, extensively worked at Barrow and Preston How quarries, and shows in great perfection most of those peculiarities of structure which so well mark the formation. I do not know of any section where all its beds are exposed ; but it probably never exceeds 60 feet in thickness. Of its relations to the coal measures, there could not be a shadow of doubt, though there were no other section besides that on the coast; and in Croft Pit it has been sunk through into the lower sandstone and down to the main and bannock seams. Along with the other upper strata, it strikes across the peninsula of St. Bees Head, and is seen in Ben How quarry (near Green Bank farm), on the low road from St. Bees to Whitehaven, w here it is made, by a remarkable fault, to abut against the lower red sandstone. Beyond this point the yellow, cellular limestone beds do not appear; but the magnesian conglomerates are found to the south of the valley of St. Bees (at Parkhouse, and in the rivulet which runs down thence towards Linethwaite), forming the base of the new red sandstone group.
Over the preceding deposit of the coast section, come several feet of gray, thin-bedded, sandy marls, to which the red jaspideous bed, above noticed, appears to be subordinate. This sandy deposit is surmounted by alternating- beds of unctuous, red marl and gypsum, amounting in thickness to eight or ten fathoms. The two substances are so mixed together, in some places, as not to be separable; but in other parts of the section (and especially in the higher and lower portions of it) the gypsum is found in strong beds, which have been much worked; and in one of the excavations was found abed, about half an inch thick, composed of a nearly pure, earthy, semi-indurated carbonate of zinc. This fact deserves remarking, as carbonate of zinc occurs in considerable abundance in deposits on the Mendip Hills, nearly of the same age with those here described.
Lastly, the gypseous marls are surmounted by sandy marls and micaceous, slaty sandstone, rising to a considerable height in the red precipice of St. Bees Head; and these are overlaid by a great, thick-bedded freestone, which in some places loses the lines of stratification, and decomposes into rude, grotesque, castellated forms. These upper rocks are identical with the finest specimens of the new red sandstone of Cheshire and Lancashire, of Low Furness, Appleby and Carlisle, and may be regarded as one of the most characteristic exhibitions of the formation to be seen in our island.
The several beds entering into the structure of St. Bees Head, are carried by their south-western dip, and by a downcast fault, one after the other under the sea; and no superior formation is visible on any part of the neighbouring coast. The upper red marl and gypsum,” completing our red sandstone series up to the lower lias marls, are therefore wanting, either having been washed away by those causes which have produced the present deepindentations of the coast, or being, perhaps, buried under the waters of the western sea.
So far the account of the accompanying; section, and of the successive groups of rocks overlying the Whitehaven coal field, has been purely descriptive, and unmixed with any hypothesis. The facts themselves contain, however, their own interpretation. I have already stated that the lower sandstone, overlying the Whitehaven coal field, resembled in structure the lower sandstone immediately overlying the great Yorkshire and Durham coal fields. The former contains, though very sparingly, impressions of Equiseta and Calamites; and so does the latter, as I have now ascertained, though I was unacquainted with the fact at the time the detailed account of the structure of the magnesian limestone series was published in a former part of our Transactions.
Again, though the “lower red sandstone” of Yorkshire and Durham appears, in some cases, to graduate into the coal measures (on which account it was classified with them by Mr. Smith in his geological map of Yorkshire); yet, when considered on a great scale, it is unconformable to them, and on that account was separated from them and arranged, in the paper just quoted, as the lowest member of the new red sandstone group. In the same manner, in the coast section above described, the lower overlying sandstone appears to be conformable to, and to graduate into, the coal measures of Whitehaven. But, during many excursions in that neighbourhood, I have traced it from the sea-side to the interior of the country, to the top of the hills above Dissington, over the summit of Whillimoor, and to the crest of the hills overhanging Arlecdon ; and thus ascertained that it spreads over the edges of the coal measures, and that, when considered in its whole extent, it is, as far as regards the position of its lower surface, perfectly analogous to the “ lower red sandstone” of Yorkshire and Durham.
But the analogies do not end here. It is proved by several of the sections published in a former part of our Transactionsf, that the “lower red sandstone” in certain parts of Yorkshire had undergone considerable movements, and been exposed to considerable degradations, before the deposition of the magnesian conglomerate and magnesian limestone: for they are here and there seen resting on its inclined edges, while in other places (for example at Pontefract, in many parts of the County of Durham, and on the coast of Northumberland), the “lower red sandstone” and magnesian limestone graduate insensibly into each other, without any break of continuity whatsoever. Now we meet with precisely the same accidents of position in the neighbourhood of Whitehaven : for in following- the overlying deposits into the interior of the coal field, we find many traces of magnesian'conglomerates, with rolled masses of mountain limestone, in every respect identical with those of the coast section (for example, at Gilgaron, near Arlecdon, at Sand Closes, &c.); and we have the clearest proof that the lower red sandstone had been exposed to considerable degradations, and scooped out into great hollows before the conglomerates, which form the base of the magnesian limestone, were first accumulated. It follows, therefore, that the lower red sandstone” overlying the Yorkshire and Durham coal fields, and the lower red sandstone of Cumberland, are identical in their structure, their relations, their fossils, and in all the accidents to which they were exposed during their deposition. We may therefore conclude that they are true geological equivalents ; that they are probably on the parallel of, at least, the lower portion of the 'grits des Vosges; and that they are unquestionably the equivalents of the rothe todte liegende overlying the coal series at the southern extremity of the Hartz mountain.
The magnesian conglomerates, described in the previous details of this paper, cannot be classed with the lower red sandstone, to which they are sometimes unconformable; but they graduate into, and form an integral part of, the magnesian limestone, sometimes appearing entirely to replace it.
The magnesian limestone of the coast section is evidently on the exact parallel of the magnesian limestone of Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, and Durham, though not developed on so large a scale, or separable into the same number of minute subdivisions. It is not coextensive with the upper division of the overlying sandstone series ; but it may exist in many places, under the great heaps of transported matter; and it breaks out, as above stated, in a very characteristic form, from beneath the new red sandstone of Low Furness, in a deep valley near the village of Stank. With this exception, I have never seen it beyond the promontory of St. Bees Head, in any place within the limits of the range of country above described.
The red marl and gypsum under St. Bees Head are very nearly on the parallel of the “lower red marl and gypsum” of the Yorkshire seriesf; and the red sandstone of St. Bees Head is unquestionably the exact equivalent of the upper red sandstone of that series. The “upper red marl and gypsum”  (probably on the parallel of the marnes irrisees and the keuper of France and Germany) do not appear in the coast section, for reasons already stated.
From all these facts, I conclude that the series of deposits overlying the Cumberland coal fields is, as far as it goes, perfectly analogous to the corresponding series of Yorkshire and Durham, as described in a former paper.
Nor need we be surprised at this analogy, when we consider the almost perfect agreement of the great groups of the new red sandstone series in England and central Germany. I need not repeat the evidence on which this conclusion rests ; but I may add, that it is even more complete than I supposed at the time the former memoir was published. Three obscure corals, found in our magnesian limestone, had already been figured by Mr. Goldfuss under the generic name of Gorgonia*; and on referring to his account of the localities from which his specimens were derived, it will be seen that they come from the magnesian limestone formation of Mansfield. Nor has this conclusion been drawn from the mere resemblance of the figures; for both the British and German specimens have been examined by that accomplished naturalist, and the fossils found to be specifically identical, as he has himself informed me. This fact alone, to which, however, a thousand others might be added, is a sufficient reply to the assertions of some modern writers, who have ventured to affirm that organic remains are of no value in determining the contemporaneity of distant formations.
In our south-western coal fields the deposits immediately overlying the carboniferous rocks are subdivided into three principal groups : the lowest composed chiefly of conglomerate, with a calcareo-magnesian cement; the middle group of red and variegated sandstone ; and the highest of red and variegated gypseous marls. I think it at least probable that the conglomerates of the Bristol coal fields are on the exact parallel of the magnesian conglomerates described in this paper; from which it follows that the Bristol conglomerates, as well as those in the valleys of Devonshire (if they be all of the same age), are the true representatives of the magnesian limestone, and not of the rothe todte liegende.
I ventured to express this opinion in a former paperf ; and it is greatly confirmed by the facts here stated, as well as by some other facts which fell under my observation last summer (1831), while crossing over one of the coal formations of Shropshire. About six or eight miles south-west of Shrewsbury there is a small coal field, stretching at the base of a greywacke chain from Pontesford towards Westbury, and surmounted by a series of deposits connected with the group of the new red sandstone. The order of succession, as laid bare by a deep cut for the road near Aldbury, is as follows: 1st, Coal measures. 2ndly, Coarse reddish sandstone, in character intermediate between a coarse coal grit and a true red or variegated sandstone. 3rdly, A very fine magnesian conglomerate, forming a distinct range of hills by Cardeston, Rownton, and Adenbury, and in mineral structure like the Bristol and Devonshire conglomerates*. 4thly, Red and variegated sandstone descending into the great plain of Shropshire, and of unknown thickness. Here, therefore, the section is more complete than at Bristol, and is perfectly analogous to the Cumberland coast section, with this exception, that the conglomerate is developed at the entire expense of the magnesian limestone. The conclusion naturally deduced from this section is the same as that at which I before arrived—viz. that the magnesian conglomerates do not represent the rothe todte liegcndc, but a part of the next superior division—the magnesian limestone, or zechstein.
In comparing the Bristol and Exeter conglomerates with the rothe todte liegende, our geologists made use of the best evidence with which they were acquainted. But the new red sandstone group is now better understood; and in future comparisons with Continental deposits of the same age, we should use, as our types, those sections which arc most complete, instead of the Bristol or Exeter overlying groups, in which more than one half the series is absolutely wanting. Nor is any assistance to be derived from the accidental presence of porphyry pebbles ; in as much as they occur in the Shropshire conglomerates, as well as in those of Exeter, and are in truth of no value in determining the relative age of any secondary rock.
It must, however, be allowed that a considerable part of our difficulties have arisen from the ill-defined language of some of the German geologists. The term rothe todte liegende has probably been often applied to conglomerates of the same age with our magnesian conglomerates. It originally designated certain, coarse, red sandstones overlying the coal measures of the Hartz, which, after a personal examination of them, I believe to be the exact equivalents of the “lower red sandstone” above described. In the late works of Mr. Hoffmann the same term is applied to a red sandstone under the coal measures of Wettin, and therefore on the parallel either of some of our lowest red coal grits, or perhaps of our old red sandstone.
It only remains for me to notice the importance of the lower red sandstone in another point of view, entirely distinct from the former. All who have written on our south-western coal fields, have noticed the total break of continuity between their component strata and the overlying series : and in the beautiful illustrations accompanying the paper of Dr. Buckland and Mr. Cony- beare3, it is impossible to point out the highest members of the inclined coal measures, in as much as an indefinite number of them may possibly be buried under the superior horizontal deposits. In Shropshire there is, I think, no such break of continuity, the gap being filled up by the lower red sandstone. Again, though the lower red sandstone of Yorkshire is, on a great scale, unconformable to the coal measures, and ought, on that account, to be considered as the base of the new red sandstone series ; yet there are places in that county, where, for twenty miles together, there is no trace of any want of conformity ; and the lower red sandstone (containing, as already stated, a few coal plants) forms a true connecting link between the highest coal grits and the group of the new red sandstonef.
Considering, then, that the red sandstone group sometimes forms a passage into the coal series,—that the fossils of the magnesian limestone are very nearly the same generically, and sometimes specifically, with the fossils of the carboniferous limestone^,—that the grits of the coal measures in the North of England are not unusually of a red colour,—that on the confines of Scotland the lowest division of these coal grits alternates with red gypseous marls, and passes downwards into beds of red sandstone and red shale, nearly, if not exactly, on the parallel of the old red sandstone §,—considering all this, I think that the phaenomena exhibited by our lower secondary deposits lend some support to a classification now generally adopted in Germany, which regards the whole carboniferous group but as an integral part of a great formation of red sandstone, commencing with the old, and ending with the new red sandstone series. The zoological argument certainly gives some consistency to this arrangement.
I do not, however, mean to deny the full propriety of the classification of the same great groups, now adopted by English geologists. It is good, because founded in nature ; and each country ought to be described without any accommodating hypothesis, according to the type after which it has been
moulded. But in comparing the unconnected deposits of remote countries, we must act on an opposite principle; learning to suppress all local phaenomena, and to seize on those only which are coextensive with the objects we attempt to classify. In this general view the arrangement of the red sandstone and carboniferous series in one great group, is perhaps the best fitted to the present state of our knowledge.
§4. General Comparison of the Red Sandstone Series of Scotland and England.
It has been shown by Mr. Murchison and myself, that in the Isle of Arran a carboniferous series is interpolated between two enormous masses of red sandstone and conglomerate ; and that the whole group passes, in the ascending order, into a formation of red sandstone, which may represent either one of the red, sterile parts of the Scotch carboniferous series, or the lowest division of the new red sandstone*. It is almost impossible to ascertain the precise limit of this upper red sandstone of the Isle of Arran : but the best way of approximating to it would be to trace the old red sandstone group from the south flank of the Grampians to the west coast of Scotland; and from thence to follow the red sandstone series to the coasts of Ayrshire. By the help of such an examination (a desideratum in Scottish geology), we might perhaps establish such analogies as would enable us to determine the exact upper limit of the Arran section.
I consider it now established beyond doubt, that the great masses of red sandstone and conglomerate which fringe the Highland coasts, and range, on the south flank of the Grampians, from one side of Scotland to the other, belong almost exclusively to the old red sandstone. The large development of the bituminous schist of Caithness has thrown some unnecessary difficulties in the way of this conclusion. It alternates, however, with the old red conglomerates to their base, and cannot be separated from them'}'; it is overlaid by a red sandstone decidedly of older character than any variety of the new red and variegated group ever seen in other parts of Great Britain ; it contains a suite of fossils peculiar to itself; not, as far as is known, interchanging a single species with the magnesian limestone; it is represented (and by no means in an unusual form) on the south flank of the Grampians by a series of thin-bedded strata, placed by Mr. Lyell even lower than the old red sandstone J: and, lastly, the remains of fish have been found by Dr. Fleming in groups of slaty sandstone, which, though superior (like most of the Caithness schists), to the lowest old red conglomerates, are inferior to the true carboniferous formations of Fifeshire. I conclude, therefore, that the true position of the ichthyolites of Caithness is out of all doubt, and adhere, with very slight modifications, to the classification published by Mr. Murchison and myself.
By way of conclusion, I may add, that the anomalies at which I have pointed, in different parts-of this paper, and the difficulties they throw in the way of any universal classification, can be no matter of surprise. The great cause for wonder is, that among such vast and rude, mechanical operations of nature, we should be able to trace even the approximate elements of order. Whatever may be hereafter decided about the general grouping of the coal measures, the near coincidence of even the minute minera- loMcal subdivisions of the new red sandstone series in the North of England and central Germany, and the general correspondence of their fossils, must be regarded as one of the most satisfactory conclusions of secondary geology. 
In consequence of the long delay in printing our Transactions, memoirs must sometimes appear which-, at the time of their publication, do not express correctly the opinions of the respective authors. The preceding paper is published (with the exception of verbal corrections and the addition of the short notes) as it was read to the Society. Had the concluding remarks been written now, they would have been considerably modified.
I have taken for granted that the Exeter conglomerates, and those overlying our south-western coal fields, are of the same age. Mr. De la Beche has, I believe, ascertained, since this paper was read, that the former are older than the latter. Hence, the remarks intended to show that the magnesian conglomerates (e. g. those of the Bristol coal fields, the flanks of the Mendip Hills, &c.) were not the equivalents of the rothe todte liegende, cannot be applied to the conglomerates of Exeter, at least without some modification. The Exeter conglomerates may, then, be equivalents of the upper part of that sandstone which, in the North of England, fills up the chasm between the coal measures and the group of the new red sandstone. There is, however, in all the sections of Somersetshire, Devonshire, and South Wales, a want of continuity in these formations. Their position is perfectly discordant, so that it is physically impossible the successive deposits should be complete : something is wanting, which is supplied by the uninterrupted sections in the North of England.
The discussion on the age of the Caithness schists might now be considered unnecessary; but when the paper was read, there were many members of the Society who were disposed to identify them with the ichthyolites of Mansfeld. The question is now set at rest by the generic and specific characters of the Caithness fossils, and by the discovery of fossil fish in the old red sandstone of Herefordshire, identical with specimens found in the old red sandstone of Scotland.
Were I to make any change in the Caithness section, published by Mr. Murchison and myself, I should alter the colour of the sandstone of Dunnet Head, and make it of one tint with the lower conglomerates; thus including the highest beds of the series in the old red sandstone. The formation would then have three divisions, which might be respectively compared with the three divisions of the Herefordshire sandstone, first given by Dr. Buckland and Mr. Conybeare; and the ichthyolites of Caithness would then come on the same parallel with the cornstones of Herefordshire.
If such a comparison be considered as too refined for the evidence on which it rests, I may at least assert, that the words ‘‘newer red satidstone,” placed under the colour representing the group of Dunnet Head, tend only to mislead the reader, and do not correctly represent our opinions at the time the section was publishedf. By these words, English geologists have generally designated deposits of the age of the upper sandstone of St. Bees Head, with which it was never our intention to bring the rocks of Dunnet Head into comparison J. It is true, that the upper limit of these rocks must remain in some measure ambiguous ; but I have now little doubt that the whole of them ought to be classed with the old red sandstone.
The relations of the red sandstone group of Shropshire to the carboniferous series have been described during the past year in great detail by Mr. Murchison ; and I believe his views agree perfectly with what is stated above (pp. 399, 400.). I had few details to offer, and only alluded to the Shropshire formations for the purpose of confirming conclusions drawn from certain phenomena in the North of England.
APPENDIX.
On the Demarcation of the New Red Sandstone Group, described in the preceding Memoir.
The northern line of demarcation, commencing near Brough and ending on the Scotch border, has been already noticed {supra, p. 384, note). The remaining line may be traced as follows. Commencing, as before, at the top of the flat lands near the bifurcation of the Belah, the line may be drawn a little south of the left bank of the river, so as to leave out Caber. It then turns, about south by west, till it just touches Winton, from which it ranges a little to the west of Hartley, just under the road from Hartley to Naitby, which place it incloses within the area of the red sandstone; thence, crossing the river, it enters the north end of Wharton Park, and ranging nearly due north, passes along the brow of the hill just above Kirkby Stephen. The range then appears to be about north-west for more than a mile, when the line makes a bend, passing the rivulet about half a mile south of Soulby; thence to the rivulet a little north of Crosby, from which a curve line may be drawn skirting the high lands, so as to pass a little east of Musgrave ; afterwards nearly parallel to the Eden, so as to pass about a quarter of a mile south of Warcop Bridge, north of Birks Chapel; half a mile south of Little Ormshead; and from the last-mentioned point to the rivulet just above Hoff. The line is then nearly defined by the left bank of the rivulet, and passes to the north-west just above Colby, which it incloses.
Part of the preceding line is imaginary, the country being covered by enormous masses of red diluvial gravel. But the conglomerates are seen at Belah Bridge, in the river under Winton, at Naitby and Kirkby Stephen, and in the river above Soulby. Again, the red sandstone is seen on both sides of the river near Warcop ; and the conglomerates break out in the rivulet south of Little Ormshead, and at Hoff and Burrels.
From Colby the line runs down close to the left bank of the Eden, under Beuley Castle ; thence, through Bolton to the rivulet a little south of Walk Mill; afterwards nearly parallel to the rivulet, and a little to the west of its left bank ; thence, skirting the low lands, to a point about half a mile south of Cliburne. The remaining demarcation to the Eamont, is very obscure ; but it passes by Clifton Dykes, and under Brougham Hall, into the alluvial flat of the river, and then enters Cumberland*.
For many miles, after it enters Cumberland, the line of demarcation is very ill defined. To the east of the Petteril is a lofty ridge of new red sandstone hills, commencing with Penrith Beacon. But on the road from Penrith to Hutton and Hesket Newmarket, we pass a very doubtful country, which has alw'ays been coloured as new red sandstone. Some of the red sandstones in that district (for example, at Catterlen, Hutton Park, &c.,) appeared to me, how-ever, (when I examined the district in 1823,) more to resemble the ferruginous coal grits, or the lower red sandstone ; and I think it probable (after what has been stated above respecting Broadfield, supra, pp. 391,392,) that a spur of the older rocks, between the Petteril and the Caldew, encroaches considerably on the line I am describing. I throw this out as a mere conjecture, confirmed, however, by the fact, that inclined beds of a hard red gritstone are also found along the Petteril, at least as far north as the Broadfield limestone.
Passing, then, this doubtful tract, we find characteristic beds of new red sandstone between Macey Bank and Ivegill; and thence, south of Highhead Castle to the banks of Raw Beck, and down both sides of that rivulet for more than a mile. Here, again, the demarcation is not only obscure in many places from the want of good sections; but difficult also from the appearance of lower grits, of a red colour (“lower red sandstone”?), which break out in both the above-mentioned rivulets.
No rock is visible for some way west of Raw Beck; but an imaginary boundary may be drawn to the Caldew, a little south of Rose Bridge, and thence to Green Quarry, a little south of the Chalk limestone above described. From that quarry the line sweeps round nearly by Howrigg, Height, Brackenthwaite, Cragg Houses, and Tracing Tree (almost inclosing a remarkable dislocated coal field of Rosley, now nearly deserted). From Tracing Tree it passes through a wood, a little above the confluence of Silver Gill with the rivulet, and thence under Church Hill, and on the north side of Islekirk to Parson Bridge ; from whence it may be traced near Cross Hill, a little above Bridge Mill, and close to Low Blaithwaite; from which place the line sweeps to the south-west a quarter of a mile south of Elfield, and more than half a mile above Crook Dyke Mill; and so after crossing the river in a direction about south-south-west, it turns west, ranging a little north of the Leesrigg road, through the hill above King Gate, along the south side of Brayton Hall Park, under the village of Aspatria, under Hayton, a little south of the road from Hayton to Al- lerby, just under Crosby ; thence deflecting to the north-west, it passes north of Birkby, and down by the right bank of the Ellen to the sea at Maryport.
We may pass over the coast from Maryport to St. Bees Head, as it is either occupied by the coal measures, or by the “lower red sandstone,” in places already described. Across St. Bees Head the range is defined by quarries, ending (as above stated) at Ben How4. On crossing the valley, it reappears in Walton Wood, just above Linethwaite, and thence passes just under Bank End, and at the base of an escarpment, from which it descends between Gill Foot and How Bank; and, inclosing Orgill, it disappears in the alluvial plain of Egremont.
Beyond this plain the line appears to range nearly east and west from New House to Grange; and from a quarry near the latter place it strikes about south-south-cast into the valley of Kirk Beck. It crosses above the mill, and then ranges above Head of Hail and Hall Garth to the north end of Cold Fell near Side; from whence it descends into the valley of the Calder, in a direction about south-south-east. It crosses below Thornholm, and then ranges east-south-east on the way to Farmary, and is exposed in quarries at the hill-top. It then strikes across the Gill, and is laid bare about a quarter of a mile above Hurrel Barrow; thence it ranges through Blaing Fell, leaving Lockray and Whinray to the east, just touching Bank House, and forming the whole escarpment of the hill above Gosforth.
We have no regular escarpment of the formation on the Cumberland coast south of Gosforth ; but the rock is seen at the following places: Drig Cross, west of Gosforth ; Brandreth Scar and Codlin Rock, two reefs to the south of Ravenglass, only seen at low water; on the Cross House estate, half a mile north of Bootle; and, lastly, in wells and other excavations at Mopus, Hise Moor, Well Bank, and Old Highton, all in the same neighbourhood, and on the north side of the Bootle rivulet.
Crossing the estuary of the Duddon to the limestone of Roan Head, we find the superior rocks concealed under blown sand ; but the new red sandstone breaks out south of Wet Flats, and may be traced by Little Mill, Billing Coat, and Newton; and thence by Bousfield, Stank, and Hole Beck. Beyond the last-mentioned place everything is buried under alluvial accumulations to the sea-side ; but at low water the red sandstone is seen just to the north of Rampside. It appears also at the north point of Old Barrow Island.
In the Cartmel promontory the new red conglomerates appear at Rougham Point, west of Humphrey Head; and the red sandstone is said to have been reached by boring between Cannon Winder and Ravend’s Winder, and close to Lower Hosker.
By help of the preceding notice, the demarcation of the new red sandstone may be laid down on the large county maps with a near approach to accuracy. Had the Ordnance maps of the northern counties been published, such details would have been perfectly useless, as the information would have been more correctly conveyed by a superficial colour, than by any verbal description.



   

