§ 1. Introduction.
HAVING in the preceding communication pointed out some peculiarities in the position of the great central carboniferous chain (which extends from the neighbourhood of Derby to the Scotch Border), with the view of connecting it with the calcareous zone of the Cumbrian mountains ; I now proceed to describe in detail the composition of a very remarkable portion of it, forming a mineralogical link between the High Peak of Derbyshire and the region of Cross Fell. The facts adduced will serve to explain some of the changes the chain undergoes in its range between one extremity and the other; and will also supersede the necessity of many details respecting the carboniferous zone of the Cumbrian mountains, which once formed, beyond doubt, a continuous part of the same system, and is now only separated from it by the great breaks and dislocations described in the preceding paper.
The principal section* about to be described, commences at Penigent in Horton parish, and, passing through the highest mountains of the range, ends in the plain of Kirkby Stephen. Two other sections^ connect this line with the ridge of mountains on the west side of Swaledale. Nearly at right angles to the same line are drawn a series of transverse sections prolonged across the breaks connected with the great Craven fault. They will, I hope, place in a striking point of view some of the internal movements which took place when the chain was elevated, just before the period of the new red sandstone.
The old red conglomerates do not appear in any part of the longitudinal section, but they are exposed in one of the transverse sections§, and are seen in several other places, at the junction of the carboniferous chain with the unconformable greywacke mountains of Westmoreland. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the lowest beds of the carboniferous system of this region rest upon an irregular surface of unconformable greywacke slate, from which they are separated, here and there, by great irregular masses of old red conglomerate.
The whole overlying series is essentially composed of alternating masses of limestone, sandstone, and carbonaceous shale, terminating in a great system of beds connected with the millstone grit. The limestone groups are incomparably the most continuous and the best defined, and form a kind of framework by which all the other component parts are held together. They are six in number, and will be referred to in the several sections, under the following names:—1st, Great scar limestone. 2nd, Black marble limestone. 3rd, Strong post limestone. 4th, Wold or Mosdale Moor limestone. 5th, Four- fathom limestone. 6th, Main, or twelve-fathom limestone. The names given to the 1st, 5th, and 6th groups are in common use in the North of England, and on that account ought not to be changed. The other three groups might be conveniently designated in the section by the names 2nd, 3rd, and 4th limestones: but these names would cease to have any propriety if applied to remote parts of the same chain, and therefore ought not to be made use of, except in local description.
To prevent a frequent repetition of nearly similar details, I shall commence with an enumeration and description, in the ascending order, of all the remarkable groups of strata which appear upon different parts of the lines of section.
§ 2. General Section of the whole System, in the ascending order.
1. Great Scar Limestone. Total thickness about 600 f feet.—The term scar, in the dialects of the North, means any bare precipice on the face of a mountain, and is applied with great propriety to this limestone, which in all parts of its range is marked by grey precipices and mural escarpments. The grey scars near the base of Ingleborough, of Penigent, and of Whernside; the mural precipices above Giggleswick and Malham, and the magnificent cavernous gorge of Gordale, are among the striking exhibitions of this deposit, and present a nearly exact counterpart to the features of the same limestone in the High Peak of Derbyshire.
This number is merely approximate, and there are only a few places where the whole thickness is visible. It is probably very variable, as the deposit has taken place upon an uneven, unconformable surface.
Like the Peak limestone, the group, here described, is full of fissures and clefts (often of unknown depth), in which the mountain torrents are engulfed ; and, after running in subterranean channels, and uniting with the waters of other sources, emerge in copious streams in the lower regions of the neighbouring valleys. But of all the phenomena connected with the drainage of the waters through the scar limestone, the beautiful reciprocating well above Giggleswick is the most remarkable, and even to this may be found a counterpart among the limestone hills of Derbyshire.
It contains, like the limestone of the Peak, many caverns of considerable extent; some partly open to the surface, others only to be approached through a narrow horizontal entrance. In some of these great subterranean recesses we find waterfalls of no common grandeur; in others we see no waters, but we hear them roaring among the inaccessible chambers of the rock. As a general rule, these caverns have perpendicular walls, and often nearly flat roofs. However greatly modified, they have, therefore, not been formed by the mere long-continued erosion of the waters passing through them. When the conformation is such as I have pointed out, the opposite walls are portions of the same stratum, and the flat roof is composed of the superincumbent stratum ; and the cavern has the exact appearance of having been formed by one of the beds sliding off horizontally from the side of a vertical joint. I do not think such a movement impossible. The component strata, when first lifted up, were perhaps in a very unequal state of solidification, so that one part would offer a greater resistance in any given direction than another. The points of greatest stress might also be very unequally diffused ; and, in consequence, the strata may have started among themselves, and undergone considerable relative movements, not unlike those we may observe among the timbers of a ship which has been wrecked, and thrown violently on her beam ends. In this way some caverns may have been formed by the sliding of solid beds upon each other, some by the gradual removal of incoherent or imperfectly solidified portions of the rock, and others by both causes combined. The subject is one of considerable difficulty, and I wish to exclude no agent from its proper share in producing the existing appearances. All I contend for is, that in such cases as I have alluded to, the slow erosion of the waters flowing through the interior chambers of the scar limestone is not the kind of action by which its great caverns have been scooped out.
The mineral characters of the scar limestone are too well known to be detailed at any length. The great bottom shales found in so many parts of England are almost entirely wanting in the line of section, and in the neighbouring country. Perhaps they are represented, in a very obscure form, by some dark-coloured beds of impure limestone, separated by bands of shale,
which occur here and there at the base of the series. In the same position are rarely found some dark and nearly compact beds, resembling the black marble series, but unfit for use; and in the prolongation of the longitudinal section towards the north (for example, near Ravenstonedale arid Kirkby Stephen), beds of reddish sandstone alternate with the lower portion of the scar limestone, and the whole group begins to approximate to the type of the Cross Fell chain.
There are no bands of coal subordinate to the limestone on the sectional lines; but carbonaceous and bituminous matter are the colouring principle of all the darker beds. In some instances this colouring matter is so unequally diffused, that after a recent fracture, or on a polished surface, it appears in the form of dark cloudy blotches upon a light grey base. It is this arrangement of colours, arising out of the irregular diffusion of the bituminous matter, which constitutes the beauty of some marbles in the North of Englandf. Near the line of section, however, no beds appear in this limestone which are fit for polishing, and very few indeed which are well suited to the commonest domestic architecture. In general they have an irregular fissured or shaken texture, which unfits them for such uses. It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to add—that their prevailing colours are light grey or bluish grey, from which they change, through every variety of shade, into dark blue, or bluish black —that their mineral characters are such as link them to transition limestone —and that they contain in great abundance corallines, encrinites, and all the ordinary well-known fossils of the carboniferous limestone. The highest beds of this group often become impure, and, for about thirty or forty feet, alternate with beds of sandstone and calcareous shale; in this way forming a gradual passage into the next superior group.
2. Group of Sandstone and Shale. Greatest thickness 150 feet.
The thickness of this group is extremely variable, being in some places not more than twenty or thirty feet: but when it is best developed, it appears to admit of the following subdivisions :—
(a.) Dark-coloured shale, with nodules of clay iron-stone.
(b.) Alternations of sandy, micaceous shale, and brown, micaceous sandstone, generally of a coarse, flaggy, or slaty structure.
(c.) Strong beds of hard, micaceous gritstone, alternating with similar masses of slaty texture, and generally surmounted by a few beds of meagre, sandy shale.
Wherever the shale beds abound, the thickness of the whole group is extremely variable. The micaceous flagstones of the middle portion are sometimes wanting, and the group is then composed of carbonaceous shale, ironstone, and gritstone. One of the finest exhibitions of this group is at the waterfall of Hardraw Scar near Hawes. It is also well exposed by the many torrents which descend from the mountains on both sides of the valley of Dent.
3. Second Limestone, or Black Marble Group. Greatest thickness about 45 feet; average thickness about 30 feet.
This group is distinguished from all the rest by the regularity of its stratification, which often makes it look, on the face of a precipice, like a rude work of masonry; also by its dark-coloured, compact beds with a conchoidal fracture*. Some of these beds take a beautiful polish; and when they can be raised in large slabs free from white spots, and without seams or cross joints, are of considerable value. Unfortunately many of the quarries are almost spoilt by the cracks and fissures which traverse all the component strata: and many of the more solid masses are injured by the imbedded organic remains (such as Encrinites, Caryophyllias, Productae, Spirifers, &c. &c.), replaced by pure white carbonate of lime containing little of the carbon and bitumen which form the dark colouring matter of the rock.
The thin bands of bituminous shale, separating these limestone beds, also contain organic remains ; and, among the rest, innumerable specimens of the Producta latissima and P. Scotica, which may be almost considered as characteristic of this group.
Nearly all the quarries, in the neighbourhood of the lines of section, from which the black marble has been exported, are found in the valley of Dent. I have however traced them, in the exact position here indicated, through Horton parish, on both sides of Chapel le Dale, in Kingsdale, and in Gars- dale. They may be also traced through a part of Wensleydale, and appear at the top of the precipice of Hardraw, over which tumble the waters of a mountain torrent, forming one of the grandest waterfalls in the North of England. They are there however so much changed in structure, that they are only identified by their relation to the other groups, and by beds of the Producta latissima and P. Scotica which follow them.
4. Group of Sandstone, Shale, and Calcareous Grit, fyc. Maximum thickness 150 feet; average thickness about 60 or 70 feet.
The arrangement of the subordinate parts of this group is extremely variable, as the different masses frequently seem to replace each other. In an approximate way the group may be subdivided as follows.
(a.) Dark-coloured shale, with one or two bands of crow-limestone or calliard.
(b.) Hard beds of brownish, siliceous grit, generally of a somewhat slaty texture ; containing subordinate, strong, hard beds of a calciferous grit, sometimes ferruginous.
(c.) Alternating bands of hard, brown, flaggy grit and shale.
The beds of calciferous grit are extremely characteristic of this group, and are sometimes so expanded as to form a prominent part of it. Within they are of a greyish colour; but their weathered surfaces are generally brown, from the presence of iron. The quantity of calcareous matter contained in them is very variable, as they pass at one extreme into pure, close-grained, siliceous grit; and at the other, where organic remains are abundant (which is however rarely the case), into a nearly pure limestone.
The crow-limestone or calliard is not so characteristic, as it is, here and there, subordinate to all the great masses which alternate with the six groups of limestone. It may however be proper to explain these synonymous provincial terms, as they will be frequently used in the following details. They are applied to a very impure variety of shelly limestone which is sometimes associated with gritstone, and then passes irregularly into calciferous grit, but most frequently is subordinate to the beds of dark-coloured shale. In the latter position it sometimes appears in the form of concretions; but more frequently in irregular bands, seldom more than one or two feet in thickness. The outer surface of this crow-limestone is very irregular, and is generally covered with a thin, earthy coat of hydrate of iron. It is very ponderous, in parts reaching the specific gravity of the nodules of argillaceous iron ore. It is difficult of fracture ; but when broken almost always shows a bluish, calcareous interior; and rarely has a core of nearly pure limestone.
It contains innumerable organic remains, especially large specimens of a species of Producta; and from the crescent-shaped impressions of that shell, the miners sometimes designate it by the name of horse-shoe limestone. It is obvious, that it owes its existence to the accidental presence of beds of shells (chiefly of the genus Producta), during the deposits of the great masses of shale—that these shells supplied a considerable portion of the calcareous matter—and that they also caused the precipitation or separation of the ferruginous and pyritous matter, and of the other constituents commonly found tos'ether in these calliards.
In the upper division (c.) of the group here described, there is in some places a band of coal : but as it is in general not more than a few inches in thickness, it has never been worked to any profit.
5. Strong Post Limestone. Thickness nearly the same as the black marble series (No. 3.), averaging about 30 feet.
This group, in its mode of bedding, in its colour, and in the dark bands of shale which alternate with the strata, nearly resembles the black marble system. The beds are however stronger, thicker, and coarser ; and though generally unfit for polishing, afford a beautiful material for the construction of doorposts, small pillars, coignes, coping-stones, &c.f
I have traced this group in the position here indicated, through the flanks of Ingleborough, Penigent, and Whernside; all round the valley of Dent; through the upper part of Garsdale ; and through a part of the chain of hills between Wensleydale and Swaledale. There can, therefore, be no doubt of its continuity through all the country bordering on the southern and central part of the principal section.
6. Alternations of Fissile Gritstone and Carbonaceous Shale. Greatest
thickness 150 feet; average thickness about 120 feet. The alternations are indefinite; but on the whole the group may be conveniently separated as follows.	
(a.) Alternations of gritstone and shale; the gritstone sometimes rising in strong beds; but more frequently micaceous and of a flaggy structure.
(b.) Carbonaceous shale and gritstone with a band of coal; also with two thin bands of crow-limestone or calliard.
(c.) Hard, brown, and light grey, micaceous grit, with bands of shale ; the micaceous grit in some places highly fissile, and forming a good roofing slate.
The most important bed in this group is the coal in division (6). It is ex  tensively worked in the Barbon and Casterton liberties, where it is about fourteen inches thick. The lower part of this bed is however so impure, as to be unfit for domestic use, and is chiefly consumed in lime-works*. An attempt is now making1 to work the same bed in the adjoining liberty of Dentf. It is also worked at Stoth pits near Hawes, in Baw Fell above Sedbergh, and at Kitchen Gill on the side of Naitby Fell near Kirkby Stephen ; and there are many traces of old works in the same bed near Garsdale Head I am certain that in all these places the coal is very nearly on the same geological parallel. It must therefore have been very widely extended. But it was by no means continuous, as is proved by innumerable sections through this group, which perpetually varies in its composition, and in which there is often no indication whatsoever of the coal-bed. It deserves remark that the two thin calliard beds appear to be continuous for many miles.
The slate-beds in division (c.) are next in importance. They have been extensively worked in several places; especially at Wydern and Kirkbank in the valley of Dent: but the most beautiful example of these beds is in Cow Gill, about five miles above the village, where there is a quarry of hard, white, siliceous grit capable of being split into very thin flags, coated with silvery mica, and forming the most beautiful roofing slate I have seen in the carboniferous chain.
7. Mosdale Moor or JVold Limestone§. Average thickness from 30 to 40 feet. 
The crow-limestone (No. 7.) more commonly appears in the form of two distinct bands separated by a bed of impure, pyritous shale. In this section, the beds seem to have run together; probably by the partial disappearance, or thinning out of the pyritous shale.
f The attempt was unsuccessful, and the works have been deserted since the above passage was written.
J I have been informed that the coal of Kitchen Gill is eighteen inches thick; but I have seen no accurate sections of the works. In the places where it has been most worked the average thickness of the bed is not much more than a foot.
§ The group is known in some of the valleys under the name of Wold-limestone: as, however, this word designates any tract of dry green pasture land rising out of the morasses of the carboniferous chain; and as this kind of soil marks, more or less, the range of all the calcareous groups; the term wold is a bad distinctive name for any one of them.
This limestone is less regularly bedded than the two preceding groups (Nos. 3. and 5.). The bottom beds are generally of a grey colour and of an open, shaken texture. They are frequently surmounted by two or three coarse, strong beds of a grey colour, not to be mineralogically distinguished from the most ordinary varieties of the great scar limestone, containing various fossils, apparently distributed without regularity. The higher beds become thinner, more compact, and sometimes contain many encrinital stems, and are occasionally of a dark colour. In the highest part of the series, the beds alternate with bands of dark shale, become impure and ferruginous, and frequently pass into the state of crow-limestone or calliard, with many large Products.
Detailed sections of this division would, no doubt, offer many modifications; but few quarries have been opened in it, since it contains no beds of any peculiar value, and many parts of it are obscured by alluvial accumulations. It may, however, be tracked without any difficulty, wherever it rises to the day, along the sides of all the mountains which range near the lines of section ; as well as in all the various systems of valleys which branch among the mountains between Askrigg and Kirkby Stephen. It has indeed been important to make out its continuity, as it forms the roof of a series of beds to which the Barbon coal seam is subordinate (No. 6. (6.))
8. Alternations of Sandstone, Fissile Gritstone, and Shale. This is by much the most remarkable of all the groups alternating with the beds of limestone. Its greatest thickness is perhaps as much as 350 feet; and its average thickness in the central and southern parts of the section is about 200 feet.
Like all the other masses composed of sandstone and shale, it is extremely variable in its structure, the subordinate parts either disappearing or replacing each other. In some places the alternations are indefinite: but on the whole it admits of the following approximate subdivisions.
(a.) Alternations of slaty, micaceous gritstone and shale, sometimes containing bands of crow-limestone.
(b.) Shale with bands of gritstone.
(c.) Micaceous, fissile gritstone with thin bands of shale, and with subordinate masses of coarse gritstone.
There are very fine quarries in the lower division (a.), especially at Raw- thay Gill (between Ravenstone Dale and Sedbergh), where in colour the gritstone somewhat resembles the Pennant stone of Bristol; but is more micaceous and fissile, and generally of a more open grain. In the higher part of the upper division (c.), the fissile beds have been extensively worked for roofing slate and flagstone, (e. g. Garsdale Hall pastures, High Pike in Dent, and all round the upper precipices of Ingleborough, &c. &c.) They are generally of a dark bluish grey colour, and are liable to decomposition. Round Ingleborough they are however of a brownish grey colour, and of a closer texture. Strong beds of grey sandstone occur in the lower part of this division (c.); which sometimes, though very rarely, become of so coarse a texture as to resemble millstone grit.
Two thin bands of bright coal have been found (at Rawthay Gill and Ingleborough), one in the lower (a.) and the other in the upper division (c.) of this group: and between Brough and Stainmoor (to the north of the line of section) it contains a bed of coal, which has been worked to a considerable extent.
In some of the hills near the dead of Wensley Dale (e.g. Stag’s Fell near Hawes, &c.) the shale-beds almost disappear; and the group passes into a complex deposit of hard, grey, micaceous gritstone, some parts of which afford a good building-stone, and other more fissile parts, a material for flagstone and roofing slate.
9. Four-fathom Limestone. Notwithstanding the name by which it is designated in the mining districts of the North of England, this limestone group is of much more variable thickness than any of the three preceding (Nos. 3. 5. 7.): but I believe that it in no instance entirely disappears. In some places it is not more than ten or twelve feet in thickness; in others it is much more expanded, and is not less than thirty or forty feet thick. Changes ranging within these limits are several times repeated, as may be proved by tracing these beds through the mountains at the head of Dent and Garsdale. Its average thickness in these regions is perhaps less than that which is indicated by its name. The bottom of the series, as usual, is impure, and is deposited in irregular, grey beds with traces of fossils. The middle portion is much more regularly bedded, and contains innumerable fossils, especially encrinital stems. Indeed, where the middle and upper portions of this group are largely developed, we find that large encrinital stems form the greater part of the substance of the successive beds; and where the same portions are ill developed, the stems are fewer in number and less in size—a fact, which shows the large share these extraordinary fossils had in the formation of the several beds.
At the top of this group we here and there find cherty, siliceous beds, with casts of encrinital stems (like the well-known Derbyshire screw-stones) alternating with bands of calcareous shale, containing innumerable, flattened Productae. These beds, though unimportant in themselves, offer us a valuable analogy by help of which we compare them with the cherty beds in the four- fathom limestone of the mining districts of Swaledale and Arkendale.
The strongest masses of this group (in which the fossils are all more or less white and crystalline, and imbedded in a dull grey, nearly compact limestone), are, on the north side of Garsdale, extensively quarried for the Kendal marble works; and works were opened on the corresponding strata in the valley of Dent, but are now deserted; a better material having been there discovered in the twelve-fathom limestone.
10. Gritstone, Coal, and Shale. Thickness varying from 50 to 80 feet.
The prevailing order appears to be nearly as follows :
(a.) Thin-bedded gritstone, sometimes coarse-grained.
(5.) Coal and carbonaceous shale.
(c.) Bands of light-coloured, micaceous grit.
The lowest division (a.) is of very variable structure. It is in some places very coarse-grained; but in Uldale, between Swath Fell and Baw Fell, it passes into a dark, compact, siliceous mass, exactly like the metalliferous chert of Swaledale. Along the line of section this cherty form is, however, an exception to the prevailing structure. The coal varies in thickness from a mere trace to two feet, and is in many places of excellent quality*. When it reaches its maximum thickness, it is, however, generally mixed with shale and other impurities. To the north of Ingleborough, no member of the whole series is more continuous than this coal-bed and its superincumbent shale; and it has been worked, more or less, in almost every mountain near the lines of section. But in Ingleborough and Penigent the whole group here described thins out to such a degree, that the four fathom and twelve-fathom limestones become confounded, and present a single unbroken escarpment. To the north of the line of section the same coal is now extensively worked in the neighbourhood of Brough.
11. Twelve-fathom Limestone. This system of beds makes a striking feature in many parts of the carboniferous chain of the North, being the highest limestone group of sufficient thickness to give any character to the soil or to produce a distinct escarpment. In some districts it forms the crown of a long succession of tabular hills; in others, it forms a terrace on the sides of the mountains terminating1 a succession of green pastures, which rise in interrupted slopes from the neighbouring valleys. Above it the strata often lie concealed under accumulations of black turf bog; and the highest summits of the mountains terminate in great irregular masses of tabular millstone grit. Near the line of section its greatest thickness is about eighty feet; but in one or two places it thins off and almost comes to an edge ; and its average thickness is under twelve fathoms.
The mineral characters of the group are so nearly the same with those of the four-fathom limestone, that the same description may almost serve for both. Its prevailing colours are grey, and some of the beds exactly resemble ordinary- specimens of the great scar limestone. Most commonly this group is distinguished by the abundance of encrinital stems, which in some rare instances so nearly constitute the whole mass of the strata, that the cementing principle is almost wanting, and the weathered surfaces of the blocks rapidly disintegrate and fall into innumerable cylindrical fragments. In general, however, the encrinital fragments are held firmly together by a grey, subcrystalline, calcareous cement, and form hard beds, the most regular of which admit of a good polish. The most beautiful variety of this fossil marble, is obtained from one or two of the upper beds of this group, and is quarried at Snays-wold Fell, between Dent and Garsdale. The dull grey base in which the fossils are commonly imbedded, is there enlivened by many dark cloudy blotches, arising out of the irregular distribution of the colouring bituminous matter. The group appears to terminate in a few, thin, impure beds of dark bluish limestone alternating with slaty gritstone and carbonaceous shalef.
So far the relations of the successive groups may be ascertained with a near approach to accuracy, as the various limestone deposits offer a series of good base lines to which all the distant observations may be referred. But in the remaining part of the ascending series we lose all our lines of verification ; and the sections, as might have been expected, differ very widely in their details. Out of much apparent confusion, we may, however, make out an approximate order, and divide a great thickness of strata into groups sufficiently extended to admit of a general comparison among themselves.
12. Great upper Shale. Thickness varying from 40 or 50 tonearly 200 feet.
This group is complex, containing, here and there, a band of crow-limestone,
and having many subordinate masses of grit, generally of a thin, slaty texture. On the whole, however, it is characterized by a dark-coloured shale, and makes a remarkable feature in the higher parts of many of the mountains, being often laid bare by the deep water-channels which intersect the boggy region between the first millstone grit and the twelve-fathom limestone.
On the south side of Baw Fell (in the brow above the marble quarry mentioned above (p. 79.)), a five-inch coal is, I believe, subordinate to this group ; and, on the west side of the mountain, it contains a strong band of crow-limestone. In a part of Swaledale it contains the main chert, black beds, red beds, iron beds, &c. enumerated in the detailed sections of the miners in that district.
13. First Millstone Grit. Thickness varying from 20 to 60 feet.
The term is here used with considerable latitude, being applied to a group of strata, a part only of which has the true character of millstone grit. When used more strictly, it designates a coarse, open-grained, siliceous gritstone very irregularly bedded, often subdivided by lines not parallel to the planes of stratification, and usually containing a considerable quantity of kaolin, and small rounded pieces of opaque quartz interspersed irregularly through its mass.
The prevailing colour of the group, here described, is light grey ; but this is by no means constant. The characteristic millstone grit is sometimes found associated with all parts of this group ; sometimes only with the upper part; in which case the lower beds generally consist of a hard, light grey, thin-bedded sandstone. Sometimes the millstone bands are entirely wanting, and then the group (especially when the beds alternate with shale) cannot be easily separated from that which is next superior to it.
It is finely exposed in the last precipice of Penigent, and in the strata which form the crown of Ingleborough. It also forms a part of the higher escarpment of Whernside and of Great Colm*.
14. Alternations of hard, thin-bedded, brown gritstone, and dark-coloured carbonaceous shale, with two or three beds of coal. Average thickness along the principal line of section about 60 feet.
In some of the neighbouring regions (for example among the mountains of Swaledale Head), this group contains two or three thin beds of crow-limestone, and its aggregate thickness is about 200 feet.
The only bed of coal which has been much worked, is in the lower part of the group, and varies from eighteen inches to nearly four feet in thickness. At Tan Hill near the highest part of the road from Brough to Arkendale, and at Turna Fell near Hawes, this coal is of good quality, and is extensively worked. Near the top of Penigent, of Whernside, and of Great Colm, horizontal drifts have been carried into this bed; but it is of bad quality, and not fit for domestic use, being mixed with ferruginous and pyritous shale. The hard, brown beds of grit alternating with the carbonaceous shale, are provincially termed sill-stones.
15. Second Millstone Grit. The limits of this group are very ill defined, and its thickness varies from 40 or 50 to 120 feet.
At the top of Penigent and Whernside it is represented by an open-grained, thin-bedded, siliceous grit, no part of which has the appearance of millstone. But at the top of Baw Fell, Wildboar Fell, and some of the Swaledale hills, it passes into great, thick beds of the finest millstone grit.
16. Alternations of gritstone and shale, with traces of a thin bed of coal. Thickness about 100 feet.
The band of coal is found, here and there, near the bottom of this division. In general the subordinate shales are meagre, sandy, and micaceous; and the alternating beds of grit are thin and open-grained, like certain bands associated with the groups of millstone grit.
There is just a trace of this group at the top of Wildboar Fell, and perhaps at the highest point of Whernside, under the soil and morass. It is best exposed under the highest summit of Shunner Fell, and near the top of a part of the high ridge between Mollerstang and Swaledale Head.
17. Upper Millstone Grit. Thickness 120 feet.

A most characteristic exhibition of this group is seen at Shunner Fell top, and on some other of the highest eminences of Swaledale; but it does not appear anywhere upon the longitudinal line of section. Like the other groups (Nos. 13. and 15.), it varies in structure; but it contains, and passes into, masses of the most characteristic millstone grit.
Here terminate the details of the general section; and with one limited exception, no higher beds appear among the mountain ridges extending from Penigent to Stainmoor, and to the mining districts of Arkendale and Swaledale.
Before commencing the description of the longitudinal section, it may be expedient, for the purpose of easy reference, to give a tabular view of the preceding detailed general section.
The thickness from the bottom of the whole system to the top of the twelve- fathom limestone is 1735 feet, as determined by these numbers; and from the top of the great Scar limestone to the top of the twelve-fathom limestone, is 1135 feet. Bht a small correction must be made on account of dip; and a more considerable correction on account of over-estimate, all the beds being taken at the maximum thickness, which is never the case in any one section. After all the deductions, there must remain a thickness of about 1000 feet for the alternating beds between the top of the great Scar limestone and the top of the twelve-fathom limestone ; and as far as regards the mountains of Gars- dale and Dent, 1 do not think that this is an over-estimate. It is, however, right to state, that very few of the numbers in the preceding details are from actual measurement. I wish them to be considered only as the average results of a great many independent approximate observations.
§ 3. Longitudinal section from Penigent to the plains of the Eden near
Kirkbi
This section might have been extended many miles further towards the south, through a region which, though of less elevation than the one here described, has nearly the same external characters, and is composed of similar groups of strata: but I wish to confine it to the part of the chain I have personally and repeatedly examined.
Commencing at the top of Penigent, it passes just above the village of Horton, and thence nearly in a straight line to the top of Ingleborough. The summit of Penigent is, I believe, composed of beds subordinate to the second millstone grit (Group 15.); and immediately below, the highest slope, Nos. 14. 13. 12, are finely exposed, and the coal bed of No. 14. has been worked in horizontal drifts. Then comes a great limestone precipice representing Nos. 11. 10. and 9.—No. 10. having nearly disappeared, and the twelve-fathom and four fathom limestones (Nos. 11. and 9.) making but one precipice. The remaining part of the great escarpment is composed of No. 8.
From the swallow holes at the base of No. 8. to the level of Horton Beck, all the successive beds (No. 7. to No. 1.) may be traced without a single omission. The black marble beds (No. 3.) have been quarried above Hull Pot, but are not of good quality; and the group (No. 2.) is not more than twenty or thirty feet thickf. The great Scar limestone is magnificently exhibited ; and in it are Hull Pot and Hunt Pot. The former a great roofless cavern, with perpendicular walls, from which may be heard the roaring of subterranean waters. The latter, an open crevice of unknown but great depth, as is proved by the long-continued rumbling noise of the stones which descend after many rebounds from its projecting ledges towards the foundations of the mountain.
Below Dowgill Scar is a beautiful junction of the horizontal limestone and inclined greywacke without the intervention of any conglomerate*. In the prolongation of the section through Moulton Fell, the Scar limestone presents no features deserving peculiar notice; but a little to the east of the line, above the village of Selside, is an open chasm called Alum Pot, of enormous but unknown depth. It is surrounded by grassy shelving banks, and many animals tempted towards its brink have fallen down and perished in itf.
Further up the hill (at Moor Syke, &c.) are the black marble beds (No. 3.), and after passing in succession all the intervening beds, we have, at the top of Simon Fell, the slate quarries of No. 8. c. The upper portion of this group makes a magnificent precipice on the north side of Ingleborough, and its slate quarries may be traced all round the mountain. Over this group comes a precipice of limestone, in which (as at Penigent) the twelve-fathom and the four-fathom limestones are united, the intervening shale and coal (No. 10.) having nearly disappeared. Over these comes the upper shale (No. 12.); and then the first millstone grit (No. 13.), forming a great tabular mass on the top of Ingleborough. The two highest groups of the Penigent section are therefore wanting.
In descending from the great precipice of slaty grit and shale to the river of Chapel le Dale, we pass in regular succession over every group from No. 8. to the bottom of the Scar limestone. The upper groups are much concealed by morass, but they break out, here and there, and are laid bare in the watercourses on the sides of the mountain. In the bottom of the valley (about half a mile below the Chapel) there is a beautiful junction of the horizontal limestone and the inclined greywacke ; and just at that point all the mountain streams, which in the higher part of the valley had been engulfed in the cavernous Scar limestone, burst out in one copious spring, and form the river which descends to Ingleton.
Following the line of section, we have at the base of Whernside some of the most characteristic features of the Scar limestone. It is traversed by fissures, and hollowed out into caverns; in one of which (Weathercoat Cave) is a waterfall of no common beauty, and doubly striking from the extraordinary nature of the objects which are about it.
Ascending thence to the top of the mountain, we cross the groups in regular succession, and end with a series of thin-bedded, coarse grits, nearly on the same parallel with the beds on the top of Penigent, and therefore probably subordinate to No. 15. of the general section.
The first millstone grit (No. 13.) makes a feature on all sides of the mountain top, and the coal bed in No. 14. has been partially opened on its north face. The coal bed in No. 10. (b.) has been worked in three or four different places, and the group to which it is subordinate becomes regularly expanded (though probably of rather less than its mean thickness) between the twelve-fathom and the four-fathom limestones. Here, therefore, ceases the anomaly of the Ingleborough and Penigent sections already noted; and it is, as far as I know, the only great anomaly in the structure of the districts through which the lines of section range. There is, however, a peculiarity (and it is repeated on the east side of Great Colm) which deserves notice. The four- fathom limestone all round this mountain is thicker than the twelve-fathom limestone, one group being developed much beyond its average thickness, and apparently at the expense of the other f.
From Whernside the line deflects nearly due west (without producing any confusion in the details, as all the groups are very nearly horizontal), and ranges by High Pike across the pass from Dent to IngletcnJ. The four- fathom limestone, and the slate quarries (No. 8. c.), form the top of the ridge; and on the north-east side of it, is a succession of waterfalls over the bare escarpments of all the groups, from the fourth limestone (No. 7.) down to the beds above the black marble series. Through the middle portion of these falls, runs a north and south vein (partly filled with calc-spar), producing a downcast of eight or ten yards on its west side. I mention this for the purpose of remarking the almost entire absence of great faults or veins in the neighbouring mountains, and their consequent sterility in all metalliferous minerals.
From High Pike to the top of Great Colm, all the groups succeed each other in regular order; but on that side of the mountain the twelve-fathom limestone is still in a degraded form, and the four fathom limestone has more than its average thickness. On following them to the eastern side of the mountain we may, however, remark, that one gradually increases and the other diminishes in thickness till they assume their average proportions. Over the twelve-fathom limestone (No. 11.) the three superior groups are well exhibited; and a bad two-foot coal has been partially worked in the group No. 14, which is here about 60 feet in thickness. On the highest summit is a trace of the second millstone grit (No. 15.), which, though rather thin-bedded, has here the mineral structure indicated by its name. I do not, however, think that these beds are so high in the series as those which form the highest peaks of Penigent and Whernside. Here the section again deflects to the north, and in the remaining part of its range is very nearly in a straight line.
Descending from Great Colm top to the valley of Dent we commence, as above stated, in the lower portion of the second millstone grit (No. 15.), and cross in succession every group till we meet the upper strata of the great Scar limestone, about 200 feet above the level of the river. We may remark, during this traverse, the old coal-works in No. 10. (b.) f,—the slate quarries of Little Colm in No. 8. (c.),—the old slate quarries and the Barbon coal-works in No. 6. (b. c.)4—and the various quarries which have been opened in the black marble beds (No. 3.).
In the higher part of the valley of Dent the river runs for several miles among the upper beds of the Scar limestone, and we meet with a succession of objects highly characteristic of the formation. The mountain-streams are engulfed, and the strata interrupted by numberless grotesque caverns and open fissures, resembling, on a miniature scale, the striking features of Chapel le Dale.
From Dent, the sectional line ranges over the top of Risell to the Garsdale river, close to the chapel. On the ascending line, all the beds are laid bare up to the fVold or Mosdale Moor limestone, in a great ravine called Scotchergill. On the eastern brow of Risell are quarries in the four fathom and twelve- fathom limestones; and from the upper quarry is obtained a very beautiful variety of fossil marble already noticed. On the western brow of the same hill, the coal-bed (No. 10. b.) has been partially worked; and the summit is composed of the lower beds of the first millstone grit (No. 13.). 

On the descending line there is a fine exhibition of the slate quarries in No. 8. c. Close to the chapel the river runs in the grit bands (No. 2. c.) under the black marble ; but in ascending to Garsdale Head (where the road turns off to Kirkby Stephen), all the beds up to the fourth Mosdale Moor limestone (No. 7.) may be observed to cross the channel in succession.
Both sides of Risell are much covered with alluvial matter and vegetation ; but independently of the localities above indicated, the position of the respective groups is defined by the rows of inverted green cones, provincially called swallow-holes, which often mark the presence of the limestone bands when no rock is visible at the surface. Prom many places, on the line of section, five rows of these inverted cones, each indicating the presence of one of the calcareous groups above the Scar limestone, may be seen on the sides of the neighbouring mountains.
In ascending from Garsdale chapel to the top of Baw Fell we may find, by the sides of various torrents, good sections of all the groups, from the black marble to the twelve-fathom limestone. A thin coal band breaks out, here and there, in the group (No. 4.) above the black marble beds. On the west flank of this mountain, the coal bed (No. 6. b.) under the Mosdale Moor limestone has been worked extensively; and on the same flank the coal bed under the twelve-fathom limestone has been attempted f. The quarries in the four- fathom limestone, from which large encrinital blocks are extracted for the use of the Kendal marble works, also deserve notice.
The groups of strata above the twelve-fathom limestone are of the aggregate thickness of 500 or GOO feet, and terminate at the top of the mountain in fine, horizontal, tabular masses of millstone grit, subordinate, if I mistake not, to the second group of that rock (No. 15.). All the upper parts of the section are extremely obscured by morass; but we have, I think, evidence enough to show—that a five-inch coal (breaking out about 100 feet above the twelve-fathom limestone) is subordinate to the great upper shale (No. 12.), which is here very largely developed,—and that a second bed of four-inch coal, about 200 feet above the preceding, is subordinate to the alternating beds (No. 14.) above the first millstone grit. The evidence for this arrangement may be considered obscure; but it is at least made probable by the structure of the nearest mountains of the chain.
Descending from Bavv Fell top to the head of Uldale (after crossing a region of thick morass), we meet with magnificent sections of a great series of beds commencing with the twelve-fathom limestone. Under this limestone the coal bed (No. 10. b.) has been partially worked. We then cross a series of cherty beds, analogous to those on the same parallel in the Arkendale and Swaledale sections : and further down the torrent is a great precipice (composed of the four-fathom limestone, resting on the gritstone bands and thick shales of No. 8.), over which the waters shoot in a single plunge, and form one of the grandest falls in the carboniferous chain. Below the fall is one of the finest gritstone quarries of the chain (No 8. a.); and a few hundred yards further down the valley we find great masses of highly inclined and dislocated limestone, connected with the range of the Craven fault.
The phenomena, last described, are a little to the west of the line of section, which at Uldale Head makes its nearest approach to the greywacke region. Thence it ranges over Swath Fell, to the top of Wildboar Fell, through a country almost buried under turf bog and alluvial soil. The top of Swath Fell appears to belong to the same group (No. 15.) as the top of Baw Fell, but it does not quite reach the same elevation.
At the top of Wildboar Fell we have just a trace of the group (No. 16.); but the magnificent tabular escarpment overlooking Mollerstang is composed exclusively of the second millstone grit (No. 15.) ; and on the same face of the mountain we have a succession of the finest sections, exposing all the groups down to the twelve-fathom limestone. They are, perhaps, of as great a thickness asatBawFell; but in consequence of the degenerate form of the first millstone grit (which is here an ordinary, open-grained, whitish sandstone), they are not well defined. Subordinate to No. 14. is a bed of coal about eighteen inches thick, which has been partially worked, but hitherto without profit.
Descending from the crown of the hill, along the edge of its eastern escarpment, to the level of the white grit beds representing the first millstone (No. 13.), we cross (close to a place called Dolphin Sty) the line of a great vein or fault, which throws all the beds on its north side about 150 feet below their level. In consequence, the coal-bed (No. 14.) and the accompanying grits and shales are once again repeated. This vein strikes the opposite hills (producing the same northern downcast), and is prolonged into the mining district of Swaledale.
After reaching the level of the twelve fathom limestone, we cross the bearings of one or two other veins, which have partially deranged the position of the groups. I have attempted to convey only a general notion of them in the accompanying section, for the country is so much covered with alluvion that their exact effects cannot be easily ascertained.
Continuing to descend, we come upon the edges of the dislocated masses thrown up by the great Craven fault. The horizontal beds of the great Scar limestone lie far below the bottom of the neighbouring valley: but the broken ends of the whole mass have been torn up from the foundations of the mountain, and jammed against the edges of the upper horizontal groups. The vast force of elevation is indicated by the enormous extent and contortions of the dislocated masses; and the line of greatest stress is indicated by an anticlinal axis, on the north side of which the Scar limestone, after many breaks and undulations, gradually falls down to the level of the Eden, and is buried under the conglomerates of the new red sandstone, where the longitudinal section ends. It deserves remark, that in some places near Kirkby Stephen the direction of the anticlinal axis is traced by a small vein, which, here and there, has been worked for lead. This seems to prove that, at least, some of the lead veins of the carboniferous chain originated in fissures produced by the great elevatory movements before the period of the new red sandstone. I believe, partly on the evidence afforded by the details of this paper, that many of the lead veins of Arkendale and Swaledale had their origin during the same period.
Such are the striking phenomena along the line of section. In order to make the structure of the region still more clear, and to connect it with the mountain tract at the head of Swaledale, I proceed to describe, very briefly, two other sections—one commencing at the top of Penigent—and the other at the top of Whernside, and both diverging considerably from the bearing of the principal line.
Section from Penigent to the top of Stags Fell, near Hawes ; mean bearing
about N.N.E.1
The strata of Penigent have been already described. If the line of section be made to range along the south side of the valley, above the village of Horton, we shall arrive at the great vertical chasm called Ling Gill, which gives a series of fine, bare sections, through almost every part of the Scar limestone.
Continuing the section nearly in a straight line, over the summit of Cam Pell, we first cross the outgoings of all the groups up to the twelve-fathom limestone, forming the great plateau above Cam Houses, and find that the three groups (Nos. 9. 10. 11.) which were confounded together in Penigent, are here exhibited with their true relations. YVe then cross the great upper shale and the first millstone grit (No. 12. 13.), and rise to the summit of Cam Dod, which is buried under peat moss ; and from that point may see the prolongation of the twelve-fathom limestone down Wensleydale, forming on both sides of the valley the crown of a long range of flat-topped elevations f.
Descending to Hawes, which stands upon the upper part of the Scar limestone, we cross all the successive groups in regular order. The coal (No. 10. b.) has been worked both on the east and west sides of Cam, and the lower coal seam (No. 6. b.) is still worked near the village of Gale.
In the range of the sectional line, on the other side of the valley, over Stags Fell, we again cross the same successive groups, in the ascending order, till we reach the great overhanging plateau of the twelve-fathom limestone ; and we may remark, by the way, that it is traversed by a cross vein, with a downcast of several fathoms towards the south-east. Rising from this plateau to the top of the mountain ridge, between Wensleydale and Swaledale, we first cross the upper shale (No. 12.) and the first millstone grit (which is not far from the highest level of the road from Hawes to Muker), above them are the grits, shales, and coal bands of No. 14; and the series, though almost lost among the accumulations of peat earth, terminates, I believe, in the beds of the second millstone grit (No. 15.).
Notwithstanding the constancy in the position of the several groups, there are changes of mineral structure which, had we not so many terms of comparison, might lead to some confusion. Near the eastern end of this section, the black marble beds (No. 3.) lose that mineral character which gives them their chief value, and resemble the beds of the higher group (No. 5.); and with these beds they might easily be confounded, as, in some places near Hawes, the shales of No. 4. are wanting, and the sandstone beds of the group are not more than twenty or thirty feet in thicknessf. Near the same place the shales of No. 8. become insignificant, but the micaceous, slaty beds are well developed.
Section from the top of IVhernside to the top of Shunner Fell; mean bearing
about N.N.E. J
The line here ranges from Whernside into the higher part of the valley of Dent, about five miles above the village (where the river runs upon the top beds of the Scar limestone); thence over the Cross to Mosdale, and over Cotter Fell to the top of Shunner Fell, without making any very great deviations in its course §.
The strata of Whernside have been already noticed, and the same groups succeed each other in regular order on the side of the next mountain, where however we may remark, that the four fathom limestone is of less, and the twelve-fathom limestone of greater, than their average thickness; just the contrary of what was observed among the groups of Whernside; and another instance of what was remarked before,—viz., that each of these two limestone groups is of variable thickness, and that each of them appears to be sometimes developed at the expense of the other.
Above the twelve-fathom limestone, the upper shale and the first millstone (Nos. 12. and 13.) are in their characteristic form, and over them are the carbonaceous shales, coal bands, and grits of No. 14. and perhaps a trace of No. 15; but the summit of the hill is buried in morass.
Following the sectional line, we find in Mosdale all the beds denuded, down to the Mosdale Moor limestone (No. 7.); and on the east side of the valley we have an extensive tract of green pastures, crowned with a plateau of the twelve-fathom limestone, under which are many traces of old coal works in the group (No. 10. b.).
From this plateau to the top of Shunner Fell there are strata more than 100 fathoms in thickness; but all of them are buried under the peat mosses, till we reach the grey crags of millstone grit, on the last ascent towards the crest of the mountain. We there cross the outgoings of the second millstone grit (No. 15.); of the shale and gritstone (No. 16.); and we reach the highest plateau after passing the rugged escarpment of the upper millstone grit, the last group of the general section f.
I could have wished to extend the two diverging sections, just described, as far as the metalliferous hills between Arkendale and Swaledale; but I am not sufficiently acquainted with that region to represent the prolongation correctly. I may, however, state in general terms, that the four-fathom limestone and the twelve-fathom limestone range through the hills on both sides of Arkendale, and are among the best lead-bearing beds of the country. They are known by the miners under the names underset lime and main lime, and are immediately surmounted by a group about 100 feet in thickness (composed of shale, chert, and gritstone, with some peculiar masses called red beds and iron beds), which, on the whole, may be considered to represent the upper shale of the general section (No. 12.). Over this group is a strong deposit of coarse grit, upwards of sixty feet in thickness, which probably represents the first millstone grit (No. 13.).
The coarse gritstone last mentioned is surmounted by a very complex succession of deposits about 160 feet in thickness. In the lower part of this series we have alternations of gritstone and shale, with a subordinate twelve-inch coal— over these are alternations of chert and shale, xvith a bed of crow-limestone of the extraordinary thickness of twelve feet—and the system terminates in a mass of shale about eighty feet thick, containing three subordinate bands of impure limestone. It has been stated above, that bands of crow-limestone are found, here and there, subordinate to all the great shales of the carboniferous chain. But their number, and the thickness of one of them, in so high a division of the Arkendale section, must be considered anomalous. I have, however, little hesitation in identifying this complex group (especially as it is immediately surmounted by a deposit of millstone grit nearly 100 feet thick) with the 14th division of the general section.
The preceding details of this paper explain the structure of a part of the carboniferous chain. Those which follow show the effects produced by the prolongation of the great Craven fault, and the movements which took place among some of the mineral masses when the chain was elevated.
§ 4. Transverse Sections, from five points of the Longitudinal Section,
through the dislocated strata on the line of the Craven Fault2.
The first transverse section (fig. 5.) commences from the top of Penigent, and ranges (about south-west by west) through the village of Horton, over Moughton Fell; and thence over a second plateau of the Scar limestone, to the calcareous hills immediately north-east of Clapham.
The successive groups of strata on the side of Penigent have been noticed above* ; and the various phenomena exhibited at the junction of the carboniferous system with the greywacke have been very clearly explained by Mr. Phillips in a preceding memoir of our Transactions f. My object is to connect the longitudinal section above described, with section (D.) of that memoir J.
From Clapham to the hills north of Ingleton, the range of the Craven fault is marked by an anticlinal line or break, apparently formed by the protrusion of the slate rocks during the elevation of the limestone chain. This line passes through Clapham Beck about a mile above the village, as is indicated in the section.
The second transverse section (fig. 6.) commences at the top of Great Colm, passes in a direction nearly due south over Gragreth ; thence, deflecting a little towards the east, crosses the foot of Kingsdale and becomes united with section (A.) in Mr. Phillips's paper§.
The strata of Great Colm have been described above ||; but in consequence of their gradual rise towards the south-west, some of the lower groups are brought out in the Gragreth range, the top of which is composed of the fissile gritstone (No. 8. c. of the general section) T. In descending from the top of Gragreth to the waterfall called Thornton Force, at the foot of Kingsdale, we cross all the groups from No. 8. down to the great Scar limestone. On crossing the line of the great fault, the dislocation is precisely of the same kind as in Clapham Beck; but is incomparably more striking. The whole Scar limestone has been tumbled into the valley, and seems to pass under the Burton coal-field.
Some of the dislocated masses may be considered, in their prolongation, to reappear in the inclined beds of Kirkby Lonsdale and Farlton Knot. The principal line of fault passes however (as stated in a former paper) by Ease Gill and Barbondale, and thence in a direction about north by east to the foot of Stainmoor. And in all this portion of its range, the nature of the dislocations of the carboniferous strata are modified by the immediate contact of a lofty greywacke chain, as will be seen in the three next transverse sections.
The third transverse section {fig. 7.) commences at the top of Crag or Casterton High Fell (the north-western extremity of the ridge of Great Colm), and ranging in a direction about west, by north,, cuts through the junction of the carboniferous and greywacke chains.
The highest strata of Casterton High Pell are of millstone grit; and desending in the direction above indicated, we cross every bed in regular succession down to the strong post limestone (No. 5. general section). But at a place called Short Gill, on traversing the line of the great fault, we find that all the lower groups, including the Scar limestone, have been torn up from the foundations of the mountain, bent into a saddle, and afterwards jammed between the edges of the horizontal beds and the steep face of the neighbouring greywacke ridge.
In order to explain this appearance, we must remember—that the greywacke chains existed in some form or other before the deposit of the carboniferous system—and that the beds of this system, before their elevation, must have abutted against a series of inclined planes presented by the submarine portions of the old greywacke chain. During a subsequent elevation, both the greywacke and carboniferous systems appear to have been violently acted on at the same moment, and a great strain, accompanied by a relative vertical movement, to have taken place all along the plane of their junction. But a relative vertical movement of the inclined flanks of the older mountains might not only break off the ends of the carboniferous strata abutting against them ; but would also necessarily produce a great horizontal thrust, which may, I think, account for such a curvature of the dislocated masses as is indicated in this section.
This example has been selected on account of its complexity. There are many places along the line of dislocation, where the lower groups have been torn off, by the pressure of the greywacke hills, from the horizontal system, and tilted up at a great angle, without undergoing any flexures or contortions like those at Short Gill.
The fourth transverse section (fig. 8.) presents still more complex dislocations. It ranges nearly east and west, from the top of Baw Fell to Hebble- thwaite Hall Gill, and thence across the upper part of the valley of Sedbergh to the Howgill Fells.
The west end of Baw Fell top is, if I mistake not, composed of the second millstone grit (No. 15. general section); the inferior groups along the line of section are much concealed under morass ; but several of them may be discovered by ascending the different water-courses. The four-fathom limestone and the Mosdale Moor limestone are both well exposed, and the horizontal system terminates with flaggy gritstone and carbonaceous shale, containing a subordinate bed of coal which has been extensively worked. (General Section No. 6. b.) After crossing- on the descending line (immediately below the coal shale) about fifty feet of micaceous slaty gritstone (No. 6. a.), we suddenly come to the great fault, beyond which the beds dip at a high angle about west-north-west. They now seem to succeed each other in a regular ascending order i but on the contrary we find a succession of groups representing, if I mistake not, Nos. 4. 3. and 2. of the general section ; and at length reach the great Scar limestone (No. 1.), the beds of which have a fan-shaped arrangement: the first portion dipping at a great angle in the direction above indicated,—the middle portion being elevated into broken vertical masses,— while the lowest strata gradually acquire an opposite dip (about east-northeast), and rest on the conglomerates of the old red sandstone.
Descending by Hebblethwaite Hall Gill, we have masses of old red conglomerate resting unconformably upon irregular, protruding beds of greywacke ; and in the lower part of the valley these conglomerates become of very great thickness. From beneath them on the opposite side of the valley of Sedbergh rise the steep escarpments of the greywacke ridges in which various tributary branches of the Lune have their source.
By comparing this description with the accompanying section, it appears,— 1st, That by the prolongation of the Craven fault under Baw Fell, all the groups below No. 6. were cut off from the horizontal system.—2ndly, That forces of elevation, acting irregularly upon the dislocated masses, pushed a portion of the great Scar limestone above them all into a vertical position.— 3rdly, That by this movement a portion of the Scar limestone, and three or four superior groups were actually inverted.
It is obvious, from this section, that great masses of old red conglomerate were formed on the flanks of the nearest greywacke hills before the existence of the carboniferous series ; and the beds of this series may perhaps never have abutted against the neighbouring greywacke chain. The first effect of elevation seems to have been exactly the same with that which is indicated in the preceding section at Short Gillf. The lower groups were torn off from the base of the mountain ; but not being exposed to the same horizontal thrust from the greywacke chain, they had more room to expand themselves, and fell into the remarkable position just described.
5. The last transverse sectioning. 9.) is drawn from the top of Wild Boar Fell (in a direction about west-north-west) through some dislocated masses, forming bare hills called the Clouds and thence to the greywacke chain of llaven- stonedale. The phenomena are here less complex than in the preceding section, though the dislocated beds have undergone a greater movement of elevation.
The top of Wild Boar Fell is chiefly composed of the second millstone grit (General Section No. 15.), and along the descending line we cross all the groups to the four-fathom limestone (No. 9.). The line of the great fault crosses the section in a deep morass very near the outcrop of the last-mentioned group (No. 9.); and at a very short distance the highly inclined beds of the Scar limestone rise into the bare hills, called the Clouds, and are continued (sometimes in a vertical position and sometimes contorted) to the rivulet where they are cut off by the greywacke chain.
It is possible that some of the groups above the Scar limestone may be concealed among the dislocated masses under the morass : but it is at least evident, that a portion of the Scar limestone has been broken oft’ from the bottom of the carboniferous system, and lifted up to its present position over the edges of all the groups of the general section from No. 2. to No. 8. inclusive.
The first and second of these five transverse sections (Fig. 5. & 6.) connect the facts described in this paper with those already published by Mr. Phillips-f-; and the last three sections (Fig. 7. 8. & 9.) show the very complex nature of the movements along the line of fault, where it ranges close to the junction of the carboniferous and greywacke chains.—By combining these details with those given at the end of the preceding paper, On the general Structure of the Cumbrian Mountains, &c. &c.” J we shall have a sufficiently minute account of the whole northern range of the great Craven fault, and of the structure of the neighbouring carboniferous chain.
§ 5. Conclusion.
1. I will not repeat what I have so recently stated on the changes of the carboniferous system in its range from Derbyshire to the valley of the Tweed§: but I may observe, that the region above described seems by its structure to form a natural link between the northern and southern portions of the chain. 
The whole series of strata composing the mountains along the line of section may be divided into three great natural groups : 1st, The Scar limestone. 2nd, All the alternating subordinate groups (from No. 2. to No 12. inclusive), ending with the great upper shale over the twelve-fathom limestone. 3rd, All the various deposits (from No. 13. to No. 17. inclusive) associated with millstone grit*.
The lowest of these groups is almost identical with the formation of mountain limestone at the base of the carboniferous series of Derbyshire and the Bristol Channel. The middle group has, on the contrary, little in common with the carboniferous series of Derbyshire, and, perhaps, still less with that of the Bristol Channel: but it conforms very nearly to a portion of the carboniferous system in the chain of Cross Pell. The third group appears in some form or other through the whole extent of the carboniferous chain ; and, though by no means constant in its characters, undergoes perhaps less modification in its long range than either of the other two.
A fourth great group might include all the richest deposits of our northern, midland, and south-western coal-fields; and the analogies they present both in structure and position are obvious; but they belong not to the subjects considered in this paper.
In the North of England the deposit of mountain limestone was exposed to many interruptions, arising from drift, mud and sand, mixed with the wreck of numerous trees and plants. Upon such masses as these, encrinites and corals would obviously refuse to grow, till the incoherent sediment became compacted by calcareous matter, upon which they would again find an appropriate resting-place. The calcareous beds would then go on increasing till they were again interrupted by a new incursion of mud and sand. Effects like these were many times repeated.
In the valley of the Tweed these disturbing forces were in full action from the first commencement of the deposit of mountain limestone;—in Yorkshire (as appears from the previous details) they produced very considerable effects long before the complete development of the formation;—in Derbyshire, and in the south-western coal-fields, on the contrary, they produced but a small modification of the carboniferous system before the deposit of mountain limestone was completed.
I hope in a subsequent paper to describe several similar modifications of structure in the northern calcareous zone of the Cumbrian mountains.
2. Many of the coal-beds above described must have been deposited under the waters of a sea of considerable depth ; and I never saw any shells of decided freshwater genera in the carbonaceous shales alternating with the mountain limestone; but these shales sometimes contain thin beds of marine shells, chiefly producta.?. I am of course aware that freshwater shells occur abundantly in some of our rich coal-fields; and in such cases the deposits may have taken place in lakes, or more probably in shallow bays and estuaries. It is, perhaps, in very few instances necessary to consider them of purely lacustrine origin ; especially when we remember, that in a part of the great Yorkshire coal-field (far above any of the groups represented in the preceding sections) there are beds abounding in pectens and ammonites.
3. Certain species of marine fossils abound in particular groups of the limestone strata, and so far become in some measure characteristic of them ; but I am not sure that any one species is actually confined to one limestone group. Most of the fossils of the Scar limestone may be found, here and there, in the twelve-fathom limestone, and vice versdf. Wherever there is a sudden change of mineral character, we may, however, remark an equally sudden change in the fossil species.
Thus, for example, very few of the corallines, encrinites, bivalves, &c. (abounding in the limestone) are found in the alternating beds of shale];; and impressions of coal-plants hardly ever occur in the limestone groups, though they abound in the alternating groups of sandstone and shale. This distribution obviously originated, partly in the habits of the animals above- mentioned, and partly in the mechanical causes by which the beds themselves were produced.
4. The several groups of limestone, so remarkable above all the other strata for their regularity and continuity, were evidently the result of a slow tranquil deposit, assisted by the action of organic bodies; and most of the
fossil remains subordinate to them have lived and died on the spots where they are now found. On the contrary, some of the other alternating- strata have originated in an action decidedly mechanical, and their imbedded ligneous fossils have been drifted from a distance. Hence it is that these strata are in general much less regularly continuous than the groups of limestone. The observation must not, however, be strained too far; as some of the thin bands of coal above described are, on any hypothesis, of astonishing regularity and continuity.
5. The bottom beds of each calcareous group are often impure, and contain very few traces of organic remains, and do not generally alternate to any considerable extent with shale and sandstone. We may also remark, that the corallines, zoophytes, &c. found in such positions are commonly of small size. At the top of each limestone group, on the contrary, the alternations of shale and sandstone are universal, and the fossils are numerous and full-grown. From all which it seems to follow—that each limestone group commenced at the beginning of a period of repose—that the marine animals which assisted its growth were at first few in number and ill-developed—that they gradually became vigorous and full-grown ; and were at length destroyed only after repeated irruptions of mud and sand.
The valleys in the carboniferous chain, near the longitudinal sections, are not generally excavated on any lines of fault; and are, in the severest sense of the term, valleys of denudation. Yet the actual erosion on the ledges of solid rock at the numerous waterfalls (of which I have attempted to point out the origin), is in general so small as almost to demonstrate, that there must have been a great change in the distribution of the water-channels at some period, very recent when compared with that of the first elevation of the carboniferous chain, before the deposit of the; new red sandstone.




