Introduction.
Before we give to the Society the results of our examination of the older stratified rocks of the Rhenish provinces, the Hartz, and Franconia, it may be well to state, in a few words, the objects we bad in view at the commencement of our labours in the early part of last summer. When we entered, during the summer of 1836, upon an examination of the structure of North Devon, our sole aim was to determine the position and relations of the culmiferous strata, about which there had been much controversy. Before our task could be completed, we were led to an examination of the lower groups of strata both in North and South Devon, and to follow them in their prolongation into Cornwall; and we at length arrived at the conclusion, that nearly all the older stratified rocks of both counties belonged to one epoch, and must be included under one common designation. We proposed the name of Devonian system for this great series of deposits, and we placed it in a position intermediate between the lower carboniferous and the upper Silurian groups; and therefore on the exact parallel of the old red sandstone, of which it was assumed to be the equivalent under a new mineral type. We need not inform the Society that this classification was strenuously opposed at the time it was first brought forward, and that it has been combated in some public journals since the appearance of our abstracts ; nor do we now deny that it was encumbered with great difficulties. To believe that a limestone (like that of South Devon)
overlaid by many thousand feet of slate rocks almost devoid of fossils, was of the date of the old red sandstone, and that the greater part of the slates of Cornwall (heretofore regarded, from their crystalline structure, as primary formations of great antiquity) also belonged to the same epoch, required no common confidence in the weight of evidence offered by groups of fossils. With good hopes, but not without considerable anxiety, we therefore resolved to examine some of the continental localities which seemed likely to throw light on our proposed classification ; conscious that it could never meet with general acceptance unless confirmed by some analogous development of the upper transition rocks of France and Germany.
We at first intended to commence our observations in Brittany, which, from its geographical position, might be expected to offer some analogies of structure with Devonshire and Cornwall. We however abandoned that intention on learning, from the geologists of France, that the connexion between the carboniferous system and the inferior strata was obscurely exhibited in that region, and that the evidence offered by the fossils of the lower groups was meagre and unsatisfactory- We therefore resolved to begin with the transition rocks of the Rhenish provinces, knowing that on both banks of the Rhine we should be conducted through a true carboniferous series, based on mountain limestone, into still lower groups of strata. If, therefore, in the examination of these regions, we could discover a series of beds mineralogically and zoologically intermediate between the carboniferous and Silurian systems, then would our proposed classification be confirmed by evidence of a higher nature than any offered by our English sections, none of which were perfect. But if, on the other hand, no such intermediate series were exhibited, then would our Devonian system be unsupported by that direct evidence of superposition which seems essential to its permanent acceptance as an European Deposit.
Of the Belgian groups we had some knowledge, chiefly from the descriptions of M. D’Omalius d’Halloy and Professor Dumont; and it appeared to us quite certain that the three lower members of the systeme anthraxifere (notwithstanding the more recent comparison of them with the Silurian system) must be exactly, or very nearly, the equivalents of a higher group of rocks, to which we had given the name Devonian. For the systeme anthraxifere was, as its name implied, anthraxiferous ; its upper division was, from its fossils, the representative of our mountain limestone ; and even in its lowest division there appeared (from the published lists) to be a few mountain limestone fossils : at the same time, we were unwilling, in the commencement of our labours, to encounter the peculiar difficulties of the Belgian sections.
The coal-field of Dortmund and the great chain of the supposed mountain limestone, extending (as represented in the maps of Von Buch and Hoffmann) from the right bank of the Rhine to the confines of Hessia, seemed to offer a more inviting base-line ; and we hoped to find on some part of it clear evidence of the true succession of the inferior groups. We approached this line, in the first instance, by a traverse from the neighbourhood of Frankfort; and by a long series of other traverses through Nassau and the adjacent tracts of country, we endeavoured to connect together the great formations which are spread out between Westphalia and the chain of the Taunus.
We afterwards crossed the plains of Hessia to the chain of the Hartz, portions of which we examined in some detail ; and anxious (before our return to the provinces on the Rhine) to see a country which has become classical through the labours of Count Munster, we made one long traverse from the borders of the Thii- ringerwald to the north flank of the Fichtelgebirge.
The results arrived at from the preceding observations may be briefly stated as follows:—
From the great similarity of mineral structure as well as of fossils, from the common lines of strike and dislocation, and from many other common accidents of position, we concluded that the old rocks of all the above-mentioned regions belonged to one connected series of deposits—that they all gave unequivocal exhibitions of a Devonian system—and that none of the subordinate groups were of very great antiquity.
That the great series of rocks expanded between Westphalia and the Taunus might be subdivided into the following groups in a descending order:—
(1.) A true carboniferous series, partly based on mountain limestone in its ordinary form, and partly on alum slate, flinty slate, and thin-bedded black limestone.
(2.) A series of shales, slates and limestones (afterwards found to include the great limestone of Westphalia), containing many fossils identical with those of South Devon.
(3.) A very large ill-defined group, with several characteristic Silurian fossils mixed with other organic forms unknown in England.
(4.) Masses of slate of an older mineral type, and with few traces of fossils ; placed by us, provisionally, in the lowest part of the Silurian or the highest part of the Cambrian system.
We wish to state distinctly that we came to these conclusions before we examined any of the provinces on the left bank of the Rhine, and that (with the exception of some adjustments among our lines of demarcation) we still continue to adhere to them. We may also add, that though we found no fossils in the chain of the Taunus to assist us in determining its relative age; yet were we led to conclude, by the consistent evidences of our sections, that it did not belong to the lowest of the preceding groups. But after crossing to the left bank of the Rhine we found fossil evidence sufficient to prove, that the chain of the Hundsriick (and consequently that the chain of the Taunus, which is a physical prolongation of the Hundsriick) was merely a portion of the great group above mentioned (No. 3.) in a highly altered and mineralized form. Our examination of the provinces on the left bank of the Rhine only commenced in the latter part of the summer, when we began with a series of traverses from the Hundsriick, through the basin of the Moselle, to the calcareous formations of the Eifel. We afterwards connected the Eifel with the coal formation of Belgium ; and we twice crossed the chain of the Ardennes, continuing our traverses as far as the secondary strata which skirt its south-eastern flank from Mezieres to Luxemburg.
As the general result of these observations we may state, that the successive descending groups or systems, between the carboniferous series of Belgium and the oldest rocks seen on any of the last-mentioned traverses, appeared to correspond very exactly with the successive groups (already noticed) on the other bank of the Rhine between Westphalia and the Taunus.
In making out the succession and relative age of the older rocks within the limits of Belgium, we could do little more than tread in the steps of Professor Dumont ; whose admirable memoir on the coal-field of Li&ge#, and whose subsequent papers explaining the structure of the great slaty region which extends from the coal-field of Li&ge to the Eifel and the Ardennes, are well known to the members of this Societyf. While offering our homage to that geologist for the accuracy of his complicated sections, and for his able determination of a succession of natural groups of strata, we differ from him considerably, as will be seen in the sequel, in our mode of translating them into their British equivalents. The Society will bear in mind, that our leading object was to make out whether (within the country we examined) there was, below the carboniferous limestone, any group of rocks containing fossils of a type intermediate between those of the carboniferous and Silurian systems. The phaenomena on the Westphalian frontier had led us to answer this question in the affirmative. But judging from the successive systems of Belgium, Professor Dumont had before answered it in the negative ; maintaining that there was in his district an immediate passage from the carboniferous to the Silurian system.
In commencing observations such as those on which we were employed last summer, the great point is the determination of good base-lines, to which the ascending or descending groups may be referred in the natural sections. We at first thought ourselves justified in assuming that the whole of the great calcareous zone of Westphalia was the exact equivalent of our mountain limestone. In doing this we were, however, misled by the geological maps of Germany ; even by that of Von Dechen, which had been just published. For we afterwards found that there are in Westphalia two distinct calcareous zones ; the upper (of comparatively small extent on the published maps) representing the true mountain limestone ; the lower (extending from the right bank of the Rhine to Hessia) being both in its structure and its fossils the perfect counterpart of the great limestone of South Devon.
We also assumed on the authority of the best geologists who had recently visited the country, that the Eifel limestone was the exact equivalent of the Wenlock limestone of the Silurian system. Hence we were led also to conclude, before we examined this deposit, that it must form a saddle, rising from under rocks which we had regarded as Devonian or upper Silurian. The extreme perplexity of the Rhenish sections, and the.entire reversal of the formations in the neighbourhood of Munster Eifel (where we first saw the limestone) confirmed us in this error. But we soon afterwards found that the Eifel limestone formed an undoubted trough reposing on the system of beds before alluded to—that it was very nearly the equivalent of the lower limestone of the systeme anthraxifere of Professor Dumont—and that it was in like manner the equivalent of the lower of the two Westphalian limestones above mentioned.
The great importance of determining the true age of the Eifel limestone was therefore evident. For if it were the exact equivalent of the Wenlock limestone, then would there be an end of the greater part of the Devonian system; which, during our labours in the earlier part of the summer, we thought we had so firmly established on the right bank of the Rhine, in the Hartz, and in Upper Franconia. We were, however, staggered, not merely by all the authorities which seemed combined against our first views ; but, we may also add, by the many undoubted Silurian fossils, especially corals, which are found in the Eifel limestone; so that we returned to England in considerable uncertainty as to the exact result of our summer’s labours. We had, however, established certain base-lines to which we could refer our numerous and laborious sections ; and for their further illustration we had a large coordinate series of fossils ; and out of such elements it was hardly possible to fail in establishing a true sequence of geological groups, whatever might be their classification when put in comparison with the older formations of this, or any other distant country.
Without anticipating, unnecessarily, the details of this communication, we may state, that an examination of our fossil evidence has now led to a satisfactory conclusion, viz. that there is a group of rocks, characterized by an appropriate group of fossils, in a position, geologically as well as zoologically, intermediate between the carboniferous and Silurian systems. The supposed “ Ludlow Rock ” of Belgium passes into the mountain limestone, and even in its lower portions does not, as far as we know, contain a single Silurian fossil: and our Eifel mollusca (about which we were most anxious, and of which we had procured a tine series) were pronounced by Mr. Sowerby, the moment he saw them, to form a group analogous to that of South Devon ; an opinion valuable at any time, but especially so now, while he is employed in describing and figuring the South Devon fossils. At the same time we submitted the Eifel corals to Mr. Lonsdale, who with equal confidence pronounced them Devonian. By this interpretation of the fossils we were therefore confirmed in the opinion we had formed of the age of the systeme anthraxifere before we entered Belgium ; and the sequence of the formations on the left bank of the Rhine disturbed not the classifications we had first attempted to establish in the great series of older rocks on the right bank.
But for causes of inevitable delay, chiefly arising out of the long-continued ill health of one of the authors, these results would have been laid before the Society several months since. The recent investigations of Mr. Lonsdale, on the age of the Belgian limestones, having meanwhile come before the public, we need not refer to them in detail; and have now only to express our thanks to him for his most valuable assistance, and above all for the sanction he has given to our classification by his careful analysis of some of the zoological evidences on which it mainly depends.
In closing this introduction we have now to state, that the memoir will be rendered incomparably more effective than it could otherwise have been, by the valuable cooperation of M. E. deVerneuil, who accompanied us during a part of our tour, and generously determined, after having entered into our views, to render his rich stores of organic remains (collected from the Rhenish provinces) available in the illustration of this memoir. Undertaking the description of the fossil mol- lusks of this region, he induced the Vicomte D’Archiac (eminent like himself both in zoology and geology) to become his associate. These gentlemen have drawn and described from their collections a series of the most characteristic of the Rhenish fossil mollusca, particularly those of the Devonian and upper Silurian groups ; and have furnished us not only with a scientific description of each species, but also with a tabular arrangement of them, and with general theoretical views, of high importance in determining the value of zoological evidence. In justice to these authors, we trust that the force of their descriptions may not have been weakened by translation.
Lastly, the map which is annexed (and without which the description of the Rhenish region and the sections would have been scarcely intelligible) is a reduction of the great map of Hoffmann, as improved by many recent observations of Professor Von Dechen and M. Erbreich, kindly communicated to us by the former. This map, on which we have coloured the Palaeozoic rocks according to our own classification, is chiefly intended to indicate approximately the relations of the great subdivisions of the older sedimentary deposits. Those persons who wish to study the varied composition of the rocks of igneous origin with which this region abounds, must consult the original works of the distinguished field-geologists of the Prussian school to whom we have referred.
PART I.—Older Formations on the right bank of the Rhine.
Our earliest perception of the order and succession of the older strata in the Rhenish provinces was acquired by an examination of the rocks upon the right bank of the Rhine. We shall therefore first give a very brief account of that part of the region which contains a productive coal-field, and is based upon the carboniferous or mountain limestone ; and we shall next describe, at greater length, the various strata which successively rise out from beneath it, and are thrown up into the broken and convulsed region which extends into Nassau.
Coal Measures.—This field, so rich in coal and iron, and containing the staple of the manufacturing wealth of Prussia, is surmounted on its northern boundary by the green sand and cretaceous rocks of Lower Westphalia, and to the west or towards the Rhine, by tertiary rocks and superficial detritus. That part of it which is productive is expressed by the dark colour of the Map (No. 6). It is of a triangular form, having its vertex near to the town of Unna ; while its base (which lies towards the Rhine) ranges from the neighbourhood of Elberfeldt, and passes through Kettwig and Werden to the country beyond Miilheim.
We do not profess to describe the structure of this coal-field in any detail, a task which has been already in a great measure accomplished by German geologists. It is sufficient for our purpose to observe, that in lithological characters, in its fossils, and in its beds of sandstone and shale with their courses of coal and ironstone, it is not to be distinguished from many coal-fields of our own country. In its range from W.S.W. to E.N.E. it has been affected by many powerful convulsions, the most remarkable of which appear in the form of anticlinal lines parallel to the strike; and divide, on a ground plan, the area into triangular masses, the apices of which terminate to the E.N.E. These elevations have raised up the lower beds of sandstone and shale (61, of Map), which are unproductive of coal, and have thrown the overlying or productive measures into a number of troughs. The lower strata consist in part of grits (not unlike some varieties of the millstone grit of England), which are associated with yellowish or light-coloured sandstone and shale ; and the whole series finally rises to the surface in powerful ledges on the banks of the river Ruhr, particularly near Herdecke, Westhofen, and Schwerte, etc.
In quitting the lower edges of the coal-field, we find these yellowish and light-coloured grits and sandstones (which here and there contain thin courses of coal and many impressions of plants) to be underlaid by dark grey, slightly micaceous shale, and thin-bedded, hard, grey sandstone, throughout which many small plants are distributed. This formation composes hills several hundred feet high, the strata of which rise up at great angles from beneath the coal-field. Their lowest member is composed of dark shales, which are frequently loaded with pyrites and are much worked in the extraction of alum. This “ alaun schiefer ” of the Germans constitutes therefore the base of the whole coal tract, from which there is a regular and unbroken sequence upwards, through the beds before described, into the overlying or productive field. The alum shale reposes on the uppermost limestone of this region—the mountain or carboniferous limestone of English geologists (6 + of Map).
The order here described may be seen in any transverse section from N.N.W. to S.S.E. along the escarpment of the coal-field, whether made at its western extremity or towards its eastern apex. The finest exhibitions of the lower beds are in the wooded hills between Herdecke and Schwerte on the N.N.W. and Hagen and Schelke on the S.S.E. ; and the same order on a smaller scale is found in the sections near Werden and Kettwig.
In their range to the E.N.E. these lower carbonaceous strata of sandstone and shale become much expanded, and cover a wide area of country to the north and east of Arnsberg, where they pass downwards into the lower calcareous zone to which we have just adverted.
To those persons who are acquainted with the structure of Devonshire we can convey no clearer notion of this unproductive or lower coal tract than by saying, that it strikingly resembles the “ culm districts ” of that county in the colour and. composition of the rocks, and in the abundant occurrence of small grass-like plants ; the species of which, however obscure, appear to us the same in the two countries. This sub-group is the “ Flotzlehrer sandstein” of the German geologists, by whom it has hitherto been considered as the uppermost member of the grauwacke series; a position which it does not occupy, as it is an integral part of the carboniferous system, being superior to the mountain limestone. 
The coal-field, with its associated inferior strata above described, throughout that part of its course which extends from Cromford near Ratingen to the country northeast of Velbert, is underlaid by a strong band of limestone, which, from its position, structure, and included organic remains, is recognized by all observers as the representative of the carboniferous or mountain limestone of English geologists. At Cromford this rock is fully laid open in deep quarries, in which, after the incoherent superficial deposits which cover so large a portion of this country have been cleared away, we see the strata dipping to the N.N.W. at a high angle; the ends of the beds having been truncated and reduced to a plane surface, over which the drift has been accumulated. The consideration of tertiary and detrital deposits forms no part of our present inquiry ; but we cannot describe these quarries without adverting to this remarkable appearance of the sharply-truncated edges of highly inclined strata (the ends of which have been broken off and polished, as it were, into an even pavement), and expressing our conviction that such a result could not have been brought about without much violence, followed by powerful attrition on the surface of the truncated strata, more particularly when we know that the very same phaenomenon is exhibited on the surface of the older rocks under the tertiary accumulations and drift in many parts of the borders of the Low Countries, and in the northern provinces of France.
When first cleared of the overlying drift, these ancient strata often convey the false idea of being horizontally bedded, and their real position is only ascertained by cutting into the body of the rock.
The descending order of the strata of limestone at Cromford is as follows :—
Shale and dark limestone, the thickness and relations of which are obscured.
Great limestone, light grey, in beds from two to four feet in thickness: the lower beds fetid, faced with carbonaceous shale, and in mineral aspect not unlike the great scar limestone of England. In this mass are found most of the characteristic fossils, such as the Producta hemispherical P. Comoides, Encrinites, corals, and many of the species enumerated in our list. Dolomite occurs here and there in irregular concretions throughout this rock, and is much used as a road-stone.
Black shale, in parts calcareous, with corallines and Euomphali in the lower beds.
Dark, hard limestone, used as a building and trough-stone, containing small spinose Productae, minute Trilobites, &c.
Sandy and slightly micaceous shales passing into flagstone.
Thin course of dark grey or black limestone.
The descending section at this spot is not further continuous, being interrupted by a depression and water-course ; but as other limestones of very dark colour and considerable thickness rise up and occupy the northern sides of the low hills between Cromford and Ratingen, they must be considered as lower strata of the same formation, to which they are, indeed, allied, by containing some fossils which occur in the upper beds.
In tracing this band of limestone to the E.N.E., we find it well laid open beneath the incumbent drift, in the great quarries of Brock-haus, about three miles from Cromford, where the surface of the limestone gives still more striking proofs of having been subjected to great violence, and is covered with much detritus. Near Isambiigel the limestone begins to rise into higher ground, and to occupy the surface of the country, being exposed in various quarries along the sides of longitudinal ravines, by which we are enabled to trace the connexion of the rock with the overlying beds, or lower members of the coal-field. The upper beds of the limestone pass into, and are intimately associated with, dark, flat-bedded, flinty slate, which in parts is undistinguish able from the black cherts of our mountain limestone. The mass is overlaid by shale and psammite ; and these again by other shale beds, in which occur still thinner courses of black flinty slate, &c. The whole of these beds dip under the great series of shale, psammite, and quartzose sandstone, which we have previously mentioned as forming the base of the coal-field.
Farther on its strike the carboniferous limestone assumes a still more cherty character; and in the woody hills near Velbert the prominent feature of the formation is the prevalence of chert, charged with impressions and casts of large Encrinites, so as to be undistinguishable from the Derbyshire screwstone.” Here also we have a distinct proof that the limestone and “ kiesel schiefer” dip under the black pyritous shale or “ alaun schiefer” of the neighbourhood.
In following the calcareous bands into the valley of Regrath beyond Velbert, we perceive that they still more change their lithological aspect; becoming hard and black, and exhibiting none of those fine masses of light-coloured limestone and that profusion of fossils which we observed at Cromford, near Ratingen. The limestone, on the contrary, juts out here and there in irregular hummocks, often in vertical positions and with imperfect traces of stratification ; or is bent into segments of circles, and is much altered in structure, partly from the effect of violent dislocations.
The beds which rise from beneath this limestone and occupy the tract nearTon- nesheide, are highly inclined, dark-coloured shales, in parts psammitic, in parts calcareous; and these, occupying a very considerable thickness, are interposed between the carboniferous limestone, properly so called, and another inferior limestone to which we shall soon advert. We detected some few obscure fossils in these shales beneath the limestone as well as in those above it, but not in such number or preservation as to enable us to draw any conclusions from them.
By inspection of the map it will be seen that, according to our views, the carboniferous limestone which thus gradually changes its character in its eastward course from Ratingen, is cut off in the valley of Regrath, north of Tonnesheide. We have indeed fully satisfied ourselves by two visits, after an interval of some wTeeks, that it is not curved round to form a part of the limestone of Mettmann and Elberfeldt, which we proved to be an inferior member of the series ; but is distinctly separated therefrom by the shales and psammites above mentioned, which underlie it, and occupy a superficial extent of several miles.
The upper calcareous zone, which we are now considering, is not clearly traceable at the surface through a certain distance eastward of the spot where it is cut off. In the great flexure of the coal-field to the north-east of Elberfeldt, the lower carboniferous strata are thrown about in great confusion : but in proceeding towards the eastern termination of the coal-field, where the escarpments become high and the longitudinal gorges deep, we are presented with a succession of calcareous strata which we regard as the undoubted equivalents of the carboniferous limestone ; for they maintain precisely the same relations to the overlying and underlying strata which may be followed upon the strike. These calcareous beds, rising from beneath the group of shale and sandstone before described, are associated with chert and flinty slate, and thus far resemble the limestone near Velbert. In some cases indeed the flinty slate so predominates, that the bands are better designated as “ kiesel schiefer ” than as limestone: but here and there the calcareous matter appears in considerable force ; no longer, however, in thick, but in thin, flat strata, occasionally passing into flagstone.
In the quarries near Schelke there is a passage downwards from shattery beds of sandy shale, with impressions of plants and thin courses of impure limestone, into other schists and rather thicker bands of encrinite limestone, with layers of “ kiesel schiefer”; and these are repeated in several alternations.
At a spot near Hemer, east of Iserlohn, and on the banks of the river Ohse, the limestone and “ kiesel schiefer” beds are of a similar structure, and are still more expanded: and thence to the E.N.E. the same bands can be followed throughout Westphalia, being extremely prominent at Arnsberg (the capital of the eastern portion of the province), which stands upon the black limestone and hiesel schiefer.
This limestone is for the most part of a dull black colour, is extremely carbonaceous, argillaceous, and fetid, and is usually traversed by many veins of white calc-spar. In mineral characters it is so nearly identical with the black culm limestone of Devonshire, that the description of the one rock might almost serve for that of the other. It is not, however, merely in lithological structure, but still further in imbedded fossils, that this limestone is placed in parallel with that of Bideford, Bampton, Oakhampton, and Launceston (see map of Devon, Geol. Trans, vol. v. PI. L.), being charged with Goniatites and Posidoniae, which two genera are in Westphalia, as in Devonshire, by far the most abundant fossils of the deposit. The Posidonia Becheri of Devonshire (Geol. Trans, vol. v. PI. LII. figs. 2 and 3) occurs both in this part of Westphalia and in Nassau, and we are unable to distinguish one of the flattened Goniatites of the one country from a Goniatite of the other. The “ kiesel schiefer” and black limestone of Eastern Westphalia must, we conceive, represent the ordinary carboniferous limestone of Ratingen, notwithstanding a considerable difference in their respective fossils ; because the one is a continuation of the other, and occupies precisely the same relative position in the series, as is proved by many transverse sections.
In confirmation of this view, we may be permitted to remark, that the mineral characters of no one formation are uniformly persistent over large areas. That sandstone may graduate into limestone and limestone into shale (or vice versai), and that the leading members of a deposit may be either suppressed or entirely changed, are facts known to every geologist. It is equally well known that, with every change in the lithological composition of a rock, there is often a corresponding variation in its organic contents. Observations have often proved this fact, and it might indeed have been inferred from the known conditions of animal life.
In tracing the course of the mountain limestone from Ratingen eastwards, we have remarked that the dominant character was rapidly lost, that chert and black carbonaceous matter began to prevail in the place of the thick, grey calcareous beds. How natural is it therefore to expect, that so great a change in the marine sediment must have produced a great change in the forms of animal life—that a change of conditions should have produced some corresponding change of species! The zoological distinction of two distant portions of the same band of rocks is, however, often more apparent than real, and the connecting links are generally to be traced if observations be accurate and long continued. In the strata under review, though the large Productae and corals of Ratingen are wanting, yet Goniatites of certain forms, which are among the most distinguishing fossils of the lower carboniferous rocks, are common.
This fact has been dwelt upon by Mr. De la Beche in his Survey of Devonshire and Cornwall. The group of fossils in the oolitic series of Yorkshire may be quoted as an example in point; and it deserves remark, that when any part of that series (for example, the coral rag of Filey) approaches the known types in Somersetshire or Wiltshire, the accompanying group of fossils also approaches that of the corresponding formation in our south-western counties.
We found also in the black, flat-bedded limestones a small Trilobite, which we consider to be a true mountain limestone species: and these fossils are associated with the Posidonia so characteristic of the culm limestone of Devonshire. All these facts offer strong presumptive evidence in favour of the correctness of our views.
In following this zone upon its outcrop into the eastern districts of Westphalia, we find it bending with the enormous flexures of the inferior strata, and projecting at an acute angle to Arnsberg; whence it is suddenly deflected to the south-west, exhibiting all the contortions and undulations dependent upon such a vast curvature of the line of bearing. After turning, with a south-western strike, to a point several miles south of Langscheid, it is again (along with all the neighbouring formations) bent back at an acute angle, into its former bearing, and is thence prolonged into the country near Brilon. In this part of its range it partakes of all the accidents of the neighbouring formations, and passes through a district so enormously convulsed, that all the strata through extensive tracts of country are absolutely inverted ; yet does it continue to occupy its true relative place on the surface, between the mountainous regions of the older formations and the secondary deposits of the low country to the north. Continuing its range, sometimes with, sometimes without limestone, but always characterized by its courses of flinty slate (“ kiesel schiefer ”) and its schists with Posidonia, it wraps round the north-eastern extremity of the chain of older rocks by Bleuwashe, Stadt- berg and Marsberg, and is again exhibited in another parallel zone which is prolonged towards Attendorn.
Trusting to the labours of our German friends (and particularly to those of M. Von Dechen and M. Erbreich, who have constructed the geological map of this region), we have laid down the same rocks, as repeated in two parallel troughs, surrounded by the older strata, in a tract south-east of Berlenburg.
From our own observations we are also led to identify with the same group some of the uppermost strata of the environs of Dillenburg; namely, those of Herborn and its immediate vicinity, where Posidonia schists, “ kiesel schiefer,” and bands of black limestone with Goniatites, are abundant. We defer, however, for a few pages our account of the complicated relations of this tract of country, inasmuch as the sections it exhibits are incomplete in the ascending order, and the beds are mineralized and changed by contemporaneous, as well as intrusive, trappean rocks. We first endeavour to ascertain the characters and sequence of the successive formations in the country bordering on the great coalfield, where the ascending sections are complete and the beds much less disturbed ; and availing ourselves of this sequence, we then attempt to explain the more difficult relations of tracts of country (such as Dillenburg), where the same formations are repeated through the effects of those great undulations, to which we have before alluded. We may however remark in this place, that beds which we consider (from their position in the undisturbed sections as well as from their fossils) to represent the base of the carboniferous system, have, on account of their mineral characters, been merged by many German geologists with the older grau- wacke. The result has been, that in their published tables certain fossils of the carboniferous strata have been placed below, instead of above, the fossils of the great Westphalian limestone ; which, as we now proceed to show, occupies a position intermediate between the carboniferous and the Silurian system.
Groups below the Carboniferous System.
We now proceed to consider the strata beneath the formation which represents the base of the carboniferous system of Great Britain. In their long range from a point north of Elberfeldt to the acute angle east of Arnsberg (where the beds are suddenly deflected to the south-west), the lower calcareous shales beneath the kiesel schiefer contain some peculiar reddish strata, made up of small concretions of impure limestone imbedded in a red shale. As these shales contain the Posidonia and some other fossils of the upper beds, we regard them as the base of the overlying system.
These strata are succeeded by psammitic flagstones, which near Schelke and at Hemer, east of Iserlohn, form a well-marked and persistent feature. Other shales of blackish colours rise out from beneath the psammites, and in them are courses of impure limestone ; in which, together with flattened Goniatites, we begin to observe fossil shells of species unknown in the overlying formation ; such, for example, as the very characteristic fossil (Terebratula aspera, Schloth.). These beds may therefore be considered as forming the commencement of another system, distinct from the carboniferous. We conceive that the psammites and shales are the equivalents of our upper group of the older strata of Devonshire, immediately under the culm measures, and we shall insist further on the relations of these highest strata of our present group, when we describe the Belgian series, in which they are much more expanded than in Westphalia.
The psammite and shale below the carboniferous system, in which we first observe fossils of new forms, constitute a passage into a lower calcareous system, which we now proceed to describe. The chief mass of these rocks forms the great calcareous zone of Westphalia, and is seen in numerous quarries in the environs of Mettmann, near Dusseldorf, where it crops out in highly inclined, broken, and undulating strata, and it is continued to Elberfeldt, where it occupies the northern and north-eastern suburbs of the town. It is thence prolonged in a ridge by Barmen, whence it is expanded by undulations into two zones, which range to the north of Schwelm and reunite in the neighbourhood of Hagen. From that place to Iserlohn the limestone continues to increase in thickness, and rises into bare precipices, occupying prominent ridges between the wooded hills of the lower carboniferous strata on the one hand, and the mountains of older rocks of shale and sandstone (Silurian grauwacke) on the other.
From Iserlohn, in its prolongation to the E.N.E., this limestone is much expanded between Menden and Balve, where it forms the great salient promontory before alluded to, round which the overlying formations mantle. From that point it is deflected nearly to Neunrade, whence it stretches in a long attenuated band to the neighbourhood of Meschede; and, after being lost for a certain distance, reappears to the north-east near Brilon. Before it reaches that place, it again increases in thickness, and is expanded over a large area by vast undulations, one of which brings it out to the surface at Warstein, among the superior strata, several miles to the north of its more general range.
In traversing the inferior rocks we find the same limestone occupying a great trough or parallel zone near Attendorn. Other bands of it (though in very different lithological condition) occur near Dillenburg ; and finally it breaks out in great masses on both banks of the Lahn, striking through the heart of the grand duchy of Nassau. It would be difficult to induce any one, who judged from mere mineral characters, to comprehend how all the courses of limestone, here briefly enumerated, which appear on different zones so widely separated from each other, should belong to the same formation. But we have founded our opinion upon their persistence when followed out upon their strike, upon their changes of structure in places where there is no doubt of their continuity, upon their relations to the overlying and underlying strata, and above all, upon their organic remains, of which the most peculiar and characteristic are found throughout the several ranges above indicated.
No lithological description of the limestone, drawn from one neighbourhood, admits of general application. Near Mettmann, for example, it is seen both in dark and light-coloured grey masses, partly earthy,
partly crystalline. At Elberfeldt it has an altered aspect, is very irregular in its bedding, and is of a coarse granular structure, much veined, and full of nests of dolomite with cracks and fissures containing breccia.
Parts of the rock are here loaded with, almost made up of, one species of coral, the Favosites ramosa.
The rock preserves this altered character in the sharp and peaked ridge which extends from Elberfeldt to Weipperfeldt. At the latter place it regains its regularly stratified form, and is composed of a dark grey and light grey, hard, subcrystalline rock, which stands out in slightly inclined terraces, and is largely quarried f. The so-called Favosites ramosa is still most abundant; but here, as in the environs of Mettmann, we find other fossils associated with it; the most remarkable of which are Strigocephalus Burtini, Turritella coronata(Buccinum spinosum, Sowerby), Turritella bilineata, Goldf.J. To thenorthof Schwelm,
where the beds are repeated by a fault, and the limestone is quarried in thick beds, fossils are still more abundant. Of corals we see in the southern quarries a vast profusion of the Favosites ramosa, Stromatopora polymorpha, S. concentrica, with whole beds of the genera Strigocephalus and Gypidia§. These strata are underlaid by black and grey schists which pass downwards into psammitic grauwacke, beneath which (immediately above the town of Schwelm) are other courses of limestone of dark colour and of concretionary structure, in which occur Favosites polymorpha, F. Spongites, gothlandica, Tercbratula aspera (Schloth.), with two or three species of Sjnrifera.
The same fossils are found at Hagen, and some of them in the lowest beds of the formation at Eilpe; but they are still better exhibited at Limburg and Lethmate, and in the whole of the great calcareous flexure which extends from Iserlohn to Balve.
A similar succession may be observed in ascending the gorge of the Hiinne river, from Menden towards Balve, the red shale which overlies the limestone being there much developed. This gorge resembles some of the finest valleys in the mountain limestone of England. Equally picturesque is the wider gorge, watered by the Lenne, between Lethmate and Grime, through which the high road passes. As the descending section exhibited in this spot shows the exact relations of the great limestone, both to the overlying beds of shale and psammite and to the underlying schists and grauwacke, we here give it in some detail. 
 This remark perhaps applies to every great formation of transition limestone ; but we may state that, without any reference to our classification, and before we had made out the relations of the great calcareous zone above described, we were again and again struck with its close resemblance to the great limestone of South Devon, especially in those places where it was most perfectly developed.
The Favosites ramosa, according to Mr. Lonsdale, was so named by M. Brassart, the predecessor of M. Goldfuss in the museum of Bonn. Mr. Lonsdale has decided that this coral, which is also found in Devonshire, is not a Favosites.
We here use the old names under which we recognised the presence of Devonian (British) types in Westphalia. The two species of so-called Turritella mentioned in this and many other places, have, together with some other species, been since established as a new genus by MM. de Verneuil and d’Archiac under the name of “ Murchisoyiia.” 
Gypidia gryphoides of Goldfuss, Terebratula Grypkus of de Buch. Note by MM. de Verneuil and d’Archiac ; see also posted Descriptions of Fossils and Tabular List.
The upper mass, which rises from beneath the “ kiesel schiefer” (or mountain limestone) group and overlies the great limestone, consists of dark shale with thin calcareous courses, in which occur small Goniatites and flattened Orthoceratites. These bands are surmounted by the red shale, grey psammite, black flinty limestone, and carbonaceous sandstones before described.
The descending section which is exposed on the right bank of the Lenne, in proceeding from Grune towards Altena, passes through a series of schists, flagstones, calcareous shales, sandstones, &c., in which new types of fossils begin to show themselves. These strata (to be considered more in detail in the sequel) will be shown to lie on the parallel of the upper Silurian rocks of England.
We refer to the annexed lists of the fossils of this great calcareous group above described, which will be seen to differ entirely from that of the overlying series.
In the upper limestone of Cromford, and in the thin-bedded black limestones, shales and flinty slates which take its place, we find the most characteristic fossils of the carboniferous limestone of England, and the fossils of the black culm-limestone of Devonshire ; from which we infer that this culm-limestone is only a peculiar development of the carboniferous limestone. But in the lower limestone above described, the characteristic organic remains are those of the South Devon limestone, which, in a previous memoir, we have shown to be of higher antiquity than the black culm-limestonesf. Thus are we enabled, through the evidence of the foreign sections, to supply geological links which have not yet been so clearly found in England ; and thereby we establish comparisons which must, we presume, be of general use in the classification of the older rocks of Europe.
Devonian Rocks in their Eastern prolongation to Meschede and Brilon.
In its range to the eastern parts of Westphalia, the zone of Devonian rocks which we have described undergoes great lithological changes. The shale beds become gradually harder and more schistose, and at length pass into roofing slates; and the limestones (instead of forming a great, well-defined and thick-bedded zone) are in thin irregular courses, and often very highly mineralized. These great lithological changes are accompanied by various plutonic rocks, of which there are no traces in the several districts before mentioned. They consist of porphyries, greenstones, and other intrusive masses, in ridges or bands parallel to the strata.
With the exception of a few points (where the beds are thrown off by the rocks of igneous origin), the strata of the whole elevated region are seen to dip to the south. Now the strata, which lie to the north of the great limestone, contain black and thin-bedded limestone, and dark-coloured Posidonia shales, and are obviously but the prolongation of the lower carboniferous strata of Westphalia. Yet are these strata overlaid by the great limestone, which, in its turn, is overlaid by the old grauwacke (or Silurian) rocks of the southern mountains.
It follows, therefore, that the regular order in which we have been enabled to trace these formations through so long a space is here completely deranged, and that all the great groups are absolutely inverted, the older being incumbent on the younger.
We shall have occasion to speak at greater length upon similar phenomena on the left bank of the Rhine ; therefore we need do no more in this place than register the facts as they fell under our observation.
We may, however, remark, that the occurrence of trappean rocks may perhaps suggest the cause of these enormous derangements of position, of the reality of which there can be no doubt: for we can follow the several groups along their distorted lines of strike till we trace them into the country where they are in the true normal positions indicated in the previous sections. Indeed, in the disturbed district of Brilon, we examined a section indicated by M. Erbreich, in which the lower carboniferous strata, after being reversed, fold over again and dip to the north under the cretaceous rocks (as in the accompanying woodcut).
The abundance of iron ores is one of the most striking consequences of the intrusion of the porphyritic and greenstone rocks among the Denovian strate, and where these ores occur (as is often the case) with courses of limestone, the mass is frequently charged with fossils. In this ferruginous matrix the characteristic forms of Strigocephalus, Goniatites, and Calceola sandalina, are found near Brilon and Meschede. They are also found at Martenberg, five miles south of Stadtberg (the extreme point of these ancient rocks), where the older strata are overlapped horizontally by Kupfer schiefer, greensand, &c. Disturbed, therefore, as the tract has been, still each zone may be clearly distinguished —the outer (or lower carboniferous) by its small plants, its carbonaceous character, and its courses of “ kiesel schiefer,” black limestone, and shale with Posidonice— the inner (or Devonian zone) by its limestones, fossils, iron ores and slates : and both may in like manner be distinguished from the older grauwacke (or Silurian rocks), of which we shall treat hereafter.
Besides a complete reversal of the formations (and upon such an enormous scale), this tract exhibits a very singular insulated mass of the Devonian limestone in a highly mineralized condition at Warstein, about ten miles north of Meschede. Surrounded by hills of slaty schist, psainmite and kiesel schiefer, this limestone breaks out to the surface. Its structure is very much varied, and it contains amorphous masses of dolomitic and of a veined, impure limestone, associated with hornstone and iron ore. The ore is worked in pits, some of which are upwards of forty fathoms in depth, and seems to occur in masses more or less vertical. Both in its structure and its position among the surrounding rocks, it resembles the kidney ore deposited in fissures of the mountain limestone near Ulverstone. That plutonic rocks, though not apparent at the surface at Warstein, have had their influence in producing some of these results, is a fair inference from analogy.
Some of the porphyries of these tracts, especially those of the ridges to the south of Brilon, Bilstein, and Kleine-Poppelsberg, have a character intermediate between intrusive porphyry in mass, and those varieties of finely laminated and bedded porphyritic rocks which (although they contain both concretions and crystals of felspar) are often interstratified with courses of schist and limestone, and dip along with them to the S.S.E. In the sequel we shall have to speak at greater length of the extraordinary variety of forms put on by the bedded trap- pean rocks, when they pass into the state of “ schaalstein” All the sedimentary deposits in contact with the porphyries and greenstones of Brilon and Meschede are much altered ; the calcareous bands being either blended with hornstones or impregnated with iron ores, while the schists and slates are often traversed by veins of lead and copper ore. The longitudinal valley of Hoppeke, south of Brilon, offers an excellent illustration of the manner in which the bands and masses of porphyry run along like great ribs parallel to the successive sedimentary deposits. 
Calcareous Rocks near Bensberg, fyc. 
Under this name we include a series of calcareous deposits which are first seen on the south side of the road leading from Cologne to Bensberg (near the bottom of the hill on which the latter place stands), and extend thence three or four miles in a direction about N.N.W. to the neighbourhood of Paffrath. This range, indicated by a series of open quarries, is not along the strike of the beds, but nearly transverse to it; for the several calcareous masses, where they are distinctly stratified, strike (like all the older strata of the neighbouring country) about E.N.E.
The relations of these remarkable calcareous beds are very obscure ; as they appear only here and there in low ground, and are partially overlaid by the tertiary deposits which skirt the valley of the Rhine and form a breast-work to the neighbouring hills. That they are superior to the Bensberg ridge of grau- wacke cannot, however, admit of a shadow of doubt, as their fossils link them with the great Westphalian limestone. They must therefore have been brought into their present position by one of those great flexures which have so deranged the positions of the mineral masses in the Rhenish provinces, and of which we have some indications in the dips presented by the strata of the neighbouring hills. It is also clear that they took their present position long before the existence of the valley of the Rhine, or of any of the bordering tertiary deposits of brown coal and sand.
The beds near the Bensberg road are ill exposed, but abound in fossils. Crossing, however, to the north, we meet with several quarries, having nearly the same fossils, of which the beds exhibit a steady dip of more than 30° to a point about S.E. by E. These may be called the Refrath series, and evidently belong to the same formation as the Bensberg. Their fossils present close analogies to those at the base of the great Westphalian limestone, and perhaps still closer to those in the lowest division of the Eifel limestone to be described in the following part of this communication, (i.e. beds of passage into the Silurian system). Beyond the Refrath series there is an interruption of nearly two miles ; after which a series of thin-bedded limestones, with precisely the same strike and dip as before, break out in the quarries. These beds (which may be called the Gladbach series) are several hundred feet in thickness, and contain very few traces of fossils.
This last group is succeeded to the N.N.W. (and apparently underlaid) by a series of beds forming the quarries of Paffrath and Hand, which are of very complicated structure, and contain innumerable organic remains occasionally in a state of beautiful preservation. The fossils of this Paffrath group are celebrated among German collectors ; and by the help of our friend Monsieur de Verneuil, who possesses a fine series of them, we are enabled to subjoin a most instructive list of species illustrated by figures. It is enough for us to state in this place, that the group of most characteristic fossils is identical with that of the great limestones of Westphalia and the Eifel.
Were we to decide by the mere evidence of the sections, we must place the Paff- rath group as the lowest, and the Refrath and Bensberg group as the highest portion of the whole calcareous series above described. This arrangement is, however, contradicted by the analogous sections of Westphalia, and we may add also, by the sections of Belgium and the Eifel; and we are constrained to admit, that the vast flexure which twisted a portion of the great Westphalian limestone into the valley of the Rhine, at the same time reversed the original position of its several beds.
Assuming this reversed position, we may therefore commence a descending section near the Hand, and connect it through the intervening quarries with the lower groups of Refrath. It is impossible for us to enter on full details ; but the following sketch of the sections may serve to convey a general notion of the very singular formation of limestone we are describing.
Gladbach group.—It is several hundred feet in thickness,- and hardly admits of any regular subdi visions,, being essentially composed of calcareous flagstone, alternating with bands of laminated meagre marls. In its mode of bedding it resembles the upper division of the magnesian limestone near Ferry Bridge. The flagstones here and there run together, so as to form thick beds, which are sometimes cellular, like magnesian limestone, sometimes recomposed or brecciated, like certain limestones of Devonshire. The ripple-mark is common on some of the thin beds alternating with the bands of marl; anG in the middle portion of the group the laminated marls almost exclude the beds of more pure limestone, which are only worked in the upper and lower divisions of the quarries.
Refrath group.—The best quarry we examined was about a quarter of a mile south of the village, and gave the following section :—
Strong beds of light, grey-coloured limestone.
Blue shale, with concretionary calcareous bands ; very full of corals and shells. Many of well-known Eifel species, including Cyrthoceratites compressus, Goldf. (Phragmoceratites subventricosus, see posted Description of Fossils and Tabular List), C. depressus, Terebratida prisca, &c.
Yellow-coloured marls, and grey and yellowish jointed limestone, alternating as far as the section was exposed to view. The whole thickness of the above beds about 200 feet.
Bensberg.—The quarries near the Bensberg road are too obscure to deserve any particular description. Among them are beds of a dark blue, hard, subcrystalline limestone, with veins of white calc-spar. The beds alternate with variously coloured calcareous shales and marls, and occasionally pass into a compact state with a conchoidal fracture. The shells and corals, though less abundant, are of the same species with those of the preceding quarry (Refrath group).
Considering the great length of the traverse across the strike, the constancy of the dip towards the south-east, and the great angle of inclination (on the average not less than 35°), the computed thickness of the whole Bensberg series would be enormous. That its thickness (notwithstanding the obscure position which it occupies) is very great there can be no doubt; but it is possible, from the disconnected position of the quarries, and especially from the long interruption between the Refratli and Gladbach groups, that some of its subordinate parts may have been repeated over again by undulations, so as to convey a deceptive notion of its total thickness. Without the help of fossils it would have been impossible to attempt any classification of this great formation; by their help it becomes a most instructive example of the Devonian system of the provinces on the Rhine, and, as we think, of its passage into the Silurian system. For the illustration of the Testacea which abound in these deposits, we refer to the additional memoir and description of our companion M. de Verneuil, and of his coadjutor M. d’Archiac. 
Devonian Rocks in Nassau, fyc.
The grand duchy of Nassau is occupied to a considerable extent by the strata of the age intermediate between the carboniferous and the older grauwacke rocks. These strata assume different lithological characters in different districts; their more peculiar features seem invariably to be derived from their association with igneous rocks. In the mining country around Dillenburg, so celebrated for its ores of iron and copper, the deposits have some lithological features in common with the altered strata near Brilon and Meschede. But in this district the order of the deposits is not inverted, all the stratified masses being seen to dip in regular order to the S. or S.S.E.; and though much expanded by alternations with schaal- stein, and in parts altered and obscured by bosses of eruptive rock, the following succession in descending order is observable. 
1st. Psammitic, thinly laminated schists and sandstones, having a character intermediate between coal- sandstones and slate-clay. These beds are charged with impressions of minute plants, and, on the whole, arc not to be distinguished from the “ flotzlehrer sandstein ” of Von Dechen, which we have shown to represent one of the lower members of the carboniferous group. Beneath and associated with these beds are finely laminated black schists, loaded with Posidonice, and containing also some flattened Goniatites, small Orthoceratites, minute Trilobites, and a few Terebratulce. Thin courses of black limestone are detected at intervals (particularly at Erbach, near Herborn) ; and kiesel schiefer is there also present. Thus, from the lithological and zoological characters, there can be no doubt that, in conformity with our views, the whole represents the lower members of the carboniferous system. 
In the development of the strata of Herborn we have perhaps more indications of a passage downwards into the Devonian system than in any of the Westphalian sections which we examined ; but the identity of the most characteristic species of Posidonia and Goniatites leaves no doubt of the true place of these strata in the series.
2nd. Psammite, limestone, and shale. This group is characterized by the same fossils as at Brilon, and we therefore place it as the equivalent of the Devonian system.
3rd. Black slates of Wissenbach. Though these beds contain some fossils which might lead us to place them also in the Devonian system, the presence of several characteristic Silurian chambered shells and Trilobites induces us rather to regard them as the representatives of the highest Silurian rocks: at all events they form the beds of passage into the lower system, and will be treated of hereafter.
4th. Arenaceous flagstone and grauwacke (Silurian), which are widely expanded through all the hilly region that stretches to the north-west.
The geologist who, in troubled districts, is accustomed to disentagle the strata containing organic remains from the trap rocks with which they are associated, will have no difficulty in making out this general succession, by traversing the highly undulating and picturesque tracts which diversify the valley of the Dill, more especially its left bank. Although the above is a correct general view of the succession when the trappean and mining rocks are left out of account, it is right to give the reader a more real notion of the condition of this tract, which has been so much perforated and mineralized by intrusive rocks. To do this in detail would be to follow the example of M. Stifft, who, in describing the duchy of Nassau by separate daily itineraries, has almost filled a thickly printed volume with mineralogical descriptions of the complicated rocks which abound in every hill and vale of this country. In truth, few of these masses have much lateral persistence ; so that the sections on two parallel lines, not more than half a mile asunder, would often differ in their detailed phaenomena. We therefore refer to a section on the accompanying plate, as representing one of the most illustrative of several traverses which we made, and in which the order of the groups is apparent, notwithstanding the very complicated derangements produced by the intrusive trappean masses.
The physical features of this picturesque district are quite in harmony with the varied condition of the component rocks ; each woody ridge being formed of the harder plutonic and altered masses, while the valleys are excavated in the shale and “ schaalstein.”
The plutonic rocks consist of greenstone, both coarse and fine-grained, some examples of which have a very thick-bedded, others an amorphous aspect. Some of the masses are porphyritic, while others graduate into simple trappean “ wacke,” and amygdaloid, and resemble the “ basalte en boules ” of French geologists, by decomposing into concentric crusts. Launionite and other simple minerals are associated with them. In one place the eruption of these masses has converted the sandstone into quartz rock; in another the shale in contact is in the state of jasper. In some localities they are surmounted by peculiar trappean conglomerates, in which organic remains are occasionally distinguishable, and they frequently alternate with the “ schaalstein,” the peculiar bedded rock to which we have already adverted, and which we will notice more at length when we describe the banks of the Lahn, where it is most developed.
On the north side of the Leiterberg, near Eibach, the limestone and shale are broken through, and thrown off both to the north and to the south ; and on the south face of the hill, near its summit, the schists have been converted into a complete jasper, which is surmounted by iron ores. The limestones are for the most part in the state of “ fluss-stein,” avariety of altered rock in which the calcareous and trappean or ferriferous matter are blended together, and which here (as also in the environs of Oberscheld) contains beds abounding in fossils. The most prevalent character, however, of the altered deposits of this district is the very general diffusion of iron ore, which for the most part is in the state of brown oxide, and pervades the shale and limestone wherever they are in contact with the trap.
Limestones of Oberscheld, Sessacher, fyc.
As the limestones of this tract of country contain several characteristic fossils in common with the zone of Brilon, we can have no hesitation in considering them of the true Devonian age. The matrix of the fossils is here also absolutely identical with that of Brilon ; in many places being so ferriferous that it passes into a complete iron ore : in other places, where the calcareous matter prevails, it is used as a flux for the ores, and hence its name fluss-stein. M. Beyrich has described this rock as being uniformly overlaid by greenstone and supported by “ schaalstein.”
Although this arrangement exists in the immediate neighbourhood of Oberscheld, we do not think it can he laid down as general. In fact, even in this tract there are strong calcareous courses of the same formation which are quite subordinate to schaalstein, and others which are unaltered are included in shales. The masses therefore which are associated with the greenstone ought not to be regarded as a distinct formation, but rather as altered ferriferous portions of a complicated group, with many different arrangements of its subordinate parts.
The mere list of fossils given by M. Beyrich supports our opinion, that these limestones constitute a member of the Devonian system. After mentioning the Ammonites (Goniatites) Becheri, Goldf., Encrinites, Caryophyllia, Orthoceratites, and Trilobites, he dwells particularly on the fact, that the Goniatites are so various and so abundant that the rock might be termed a goniatite limestone.
But M. Beyrich is, we think, in error when he supposes that certain limestones of the Fichtelgebirge described by Count Munster, and to which we shall hereafter advert, cannot be of the same age as those of Oberscheld and Dillenburg, because the latter are charged with Goniatites and the former with Clymenice; for the very rocks described by Count Munster contain both these genera.
Copper Mines near Dillenburg.
The slates of Wissenbach and the underlying grauwacke will be described under the head of Silurian Rocks. Before, however, we leave the tract around Dillenburg, we may say a few words upon its copper-mines, for which it is as much distinguished as for its ores of iron.
According to the miners (and our friend M. Erbreich had given us similar information respecting the mines near Brilon), the copper veins traverse all the rocks of the district, being, as in every other country, more productive in one matrix than another. Thus, where we meet with the common unaltered black shale, which is much expanded to the east, the veins cease to be productive, or in miner’s language, are “ cut offf.” When they enter the “schaalstein ” the copper veins are generally productive, particularly where this rock contains much calcareous spar; but they are still richer when they pass through ferriferous strata or beds of iron ore. So uniformly do these relations prevail, that although a tolerably good copper ore is now and then found in a “schaalstein” of green colour, in which chlorite prevails, it suddenly becomes richer where the vein cuts into “ schaalstein ” which is impregnated with iron. The chief veins strike from N.N.W. or N.W. to S.S.E. and S.E., and the smaller branch veins are oblique to these directions. We examined some lodes of excellent quality six to seven feet wide, which were then worked by the English German Mining Company. We were conducted to them by our intelligent countryman M. Petherwick, to whom we owe our information ; and we have no doubt that these mines might be worked to great profit, even in a country where the forests alone supply the necessary fuel, were the land-transport shorter and less expensive. Up to this moment they have never been followed to any great depth ; and are merely worked by horizontal galleries driven on their bearing through the sides of the steep hills which they intersect. Lead ores also occur in this district, but they are in much less abundance than those of copper.
Devonian Rocks of the Lahn. (Schaalstein, fyc.)
The Devonian limestones are again exhibited in broad irregular bands on both banks of the Lahn, occupying, here and there, a long elliptical area, of which the major axis extends (in a north-easterly direction) from a point beyond Wetzlar to a point on the Lahn a few miles below Dietz. The transverse axis may be placed near Hadamar, and is not more than eight or ten miles in length. Within this tract we can no longer distinctly trace the links which connect these rocks with the superior or carboniferous deposits, the Flotzlehrer sandstein and Posidonia schists not having been detected in union with them. But the whole system is surrounded by older strata of grauwacke ; and hence, as seen on the map, it appears to be disposed in a great broken trough or basin. The existence of such a trough is, however, by no means indicated by the concentric dip of the surrounding strata; for on the greater part of all the transverse sections there is a prevailing dip to the south-east, which gives the calcareous series, on the south side, the appearance of plunging, not merely under the grauwacke, but also under the whole chain of the Taunus. In short, we conceive the Lahn limestones to occupy what, in a subsequent part of our paper, we call an inclined trough or basin.
The chief depositary strata in this shattered trough consist of limestone, sometimes associated with shale, but for the most part interstratified with vast expansions of “schaalstein ” Besides these laminated deposits, igneous rocks of many varieties, from true eruptive porphyry in mass, basalt, greenstone, to slaty porphyry and bedded traps, are apparent at the surface. Iron ore is also very generally diffused, and here and there is worked. The limestones, though occasionally flat-bedded dark-coloured compact or earthy, for the most part are thick-bedded, in a highly crystalline condition, and are largely quarried as ornamental marbles f. There is perhaps no stronger indication of the great chemical changes to which the strata have been subjected than the numerous mineral springs which burst out at so many points in these parts of Nassau ; for we quite agree with M. StifFt, that the springs are the still remaining evidences of former plutonic action.
Schaalstein.—This rock is so dominant and persistent on both banks of the Lahn, the limestone being often completely subordinate to it, that M. StifFt* has fixed upon it as the geological horizon by which the grauwacke and slaty rocks of the Rhine are separated into overlying and underlying deposits. Though this may be a correct observation when applied to parts of the duchy of Nassau, such a mode of distinguishing the age of strata by their mineral condition is seldom tenable through large areas. Admitting, therefore, that the peculiar rock called “schaalstein” (whether as seen on the Lahn, near Dillenburg, or near Brilon) is for the most part associated with strata of an age intermediate between the carboniferous and Silurian epochs, we cannot invariably so define its position ; for some portions of it are found to alternate with beds of the underlying system, especially the grauwacke which ranges up to the north flank of the Taunus. 
But what is this schaalstein? We answer, that this protean rock has clearly originated in submarine plutonic action. Notwithstanding this origin, it is a completely bedded rock which alternates with limestone and shale, and occasionally contains organic remains ; is regularly jointed ; and assumes, in short, every character common to deposits which have been formed by submarine action. After describing all the varieties in the composition of schaalstein, M. StifFt places it as a rock intermediate between schist and greenstone. The schistose varieties alternate with the underlying strata of quartzose grauwacke and contain much lime and talc (chlorite ?). The greenstone varieties consist of various forms of stratified trap, sometimes fine amygdaloidal, sometimes in the form of a trap breccia, and gradually pass into flaggy and porphyritic greenstone. The prevalent varieties, however, are made up of thin broken plates of schist and chlorite, mixed up with decomposing felspar, some sand, and much carbonate of lime; the whole so arranged as to flake or shale off under the hammer, and hence its name (schaalstein or shale stone f). In many situations it is copiously charged with chlorite, in others with iron ore, but white calcareous spar is perhaps the most common subordinate ingredient.
Though finely laminated and occasionally very shaly, it is often thick-bedded, and is then (particularly if the lime and other ingredients be equably diffused) a very good building-stone; and it is much quarried for that purpose, as it is easily worked. Its colours are of course as various as its composition; viz. greenish, greyish and reddish. In one word, it is a plutonic recomposed rock; the description of any portion of which, taken from that end of the series where it is in contact with greenstone and porphyry, must differ essentially from that of the other extreme where it graduates into schist. When alternating indefinitely with schist and limestone, the trappean materials are less abundant than the fragments derived from the other submarine deposits with which the igneous materials are mixed up. The calcareous matter (often in glandular and concretionary forms) may partly have resulted from contemporaneous springs highly charged with carbonate of lime, and may, in part, have been derived mechanically from the beds of limestone with which the schaalstein is so intimately associated.
The schaalstein occupies bold cliffs on the banks of the Lahn near Wetzlar, Weilburg and Limburg. Between the two last-mentioned towns it may be studied in all its varieties, alternating with limestone and shale, and broken through at intervals by bosses of eruptive trap which have altered and dislocated the strata. Beautiful examples of the contemporaneous and intrusive trap rocks, and their relations to the regular deposits, are exhibited in the deep picturesque gorges of the Lahn near Weilburg.
Limestones of the Lahn—These limestones, on the whole, appear to be subordinate to the schaalsteins and schists of the tract we are considering, and are of various colours and texture. In their most unaltered condition (e.g. on the north side of the river opposite Limburg) they are dark grey, regularly bedded, sometimes argillaceous, and with white veins. At Carpenheim, near Wetzlar, the rock is seen in very thick beds overlying ferriferous strata, containing in parts small pisolitic and granular iron ore, which are loaded with various shells, including Goniatites. Porphyritic and other igneous rocks appear in the vicinity.
Left Bank of the Lahn, near Wetzlar.
Between Wetzlar and Limburg the limestone is found in several patches, sometimes with, sometimes without iron ores, which near Weilburg occur in beds ; but in many instances they seem to traverse the strata irregularly, like the masses of iron ore, &c., at Warstein above mentioned.
The locality at which the limestone of the Lahn has afforded the greatest number of organic remains, was first pointed out by M. Beyrich. The beds in question protrude in the slopes of the left bank of the river near the spot called Miinchen-Miihle, about two miles above Villmar, and nearly one mile above the village of Arfurth. Here the descending order of the strata is as follows :—
1st. Beds of weathered, white, decomposing limestone in a state resembling incoherent, gritty chalk marl, or calcaire grossier. 2nd. Bluish grey limestone with white veins decomposing to a buff or fawn colour. 3rd. Schaalstein, in cliffs of fifty and sixty feet in height, rising at an angle of 40° from beneath the above. The schaalstein is in parts almost crystalline, but is both regularly bedded and jointed, andalso partially traversed by a cleavage oblique to the bedding.
The shells which occur in the white or upper beds identify the deposit beyond all doubt with the Devonian limestones of Westphalia. Besides the Strigocephalus Burtini, Bellerophon lineatus, Terebrotvla prisca, and several Devonian corals, such as Favosites polymorpha and F. Spongites, we find here six species of Turritella (ISlurchisouia ?), two of which, T. bilineata and T. coronata, are very abundant near Elberfeldt. The entire absence of the Nautilacece, so common in other parts of this region
where rocks of the same age abound, is remarked upon by M. Beyrich. We should however recollect, that all the fossils from the spot in question have been found in beds a few feet in thickness, and that they therefore characterize only one very small member of the Devonian system Associated with several Terebratula of the Eifel, M. Beyrich found here an Ostrea, a genus which was thought to exist only in strata of much less antiquity.
On the whole, however, the fossils of Miinchen-Miihle have a true intermediate character, inclining rather more to the carboniferous than to the Silurian types; and we therefore infer that they lie in the upper limestones of the Devonian system. Near Arfurth, where the Lahn runs in a great rent, the strata on the right bank dipping to the N.N.E.
and those on the left bank to the S.S.W., a limestone of grey colours alternates with schaalstein and schist, and contains corals, Goniatites, and some small Trilobites. In descending the river to Villmar it becomes much more crystalline, and is in parts a complete marble, of greyish, whitish, mottled red and blue colours, and is much charged with corals identical with those of Devonshire.
The same rock, offering a still greater number of mineral varieties, is seen near Dietz, where the limestone is in contact with porphyry and trap. When polished the marbles of Dietz and Villmar are indeed perfectly identical with our rocks of Babbicombe and Torquay, both in colour, composition, and in the species of corals with which they abound. The Strigocephali and other shells characteristic of the group in the Rhenish provinces are not merely found in these marbles, but occasionally in the associated beds of schaalstein and schist.
To the north-west of the town of Dietz the Devonian limestones are underlaid by a great thickness of slaty rocks, some parts of which doubtless represent the fossiliferous slates of Wissenbach, like which they repose upon, and graduate downwards into, arenaceous flagstone and grauwacke. Near Dietz, however, these schists are much more expanded than in any other portion of the tracts we are here describing. The transverse section will help to explain the relations of the rocks of igneous origin to those of sedimentary deposit. In many places where trap rocks abound, the limestone loses nearly all traces of bedding (as for example near Hadamar), and occasionally becomes dolomitized. We consider, however, all the calcareous masses near the banks of the Lahn and within the limits of the elliptical area we have been last considering, to belong to one geological epoch; though, in a country so dislocated and obscured by plutonic eruptions, it is no easy task to readjust the different broken and altered fragments.
The previous conclusion is drawn from the structure of the great group of rocks we have been last describing, from their relation to older groups, and, above all, from their characteristic fossils. The enormous apparent thickness of the group, under any interpretation of the transverse sections, might at first sight seem to put it out of all relation to the great Devonian limestone of Westphalia and (as we shall afterwards prove) of Belgium. But we have already shown that we may rid ourselves of a part of this difficulty by the supposition of an inclined basin or trough, for the reality of which we think there is good evidence. Again, the great thickness of the group is a natural, and we might say an inevitable consequence, of the great development of the contemporaneous erupted and regenerated trappean rocks, which (both in the country of Dillenburg and on the Lahn) are so associated with the Devonian series as to form an integral portion of it.
Silurian Rocks 
We have endeavoured to show that certain groups of strata, above described, occupy, in the descending sections, the place of the old red sandstone of England, and that they present a group of fossils intermediate between those of the carboniferous and Silurian systems. We have therefore designated them by the name of Devonian system. It remains forus to notice the lower groups of the descending sections, and to show the analogies they present, both in their position and their fossils, with the Silurian system.
That such lower groups exist is proved by a series of parallel transverse sections from the coal-field of Westphalia, across the Devonian strata above described, into the more elevated and rocky regions which constitute the right bank of the Rhine. Taking any one of the great roads which run to the south from Elberfeldt, Schwelm, Hagen, or Lethmate, these schistose and grauwacke rocks, with occasional calcareous courses, are seen to rise up conformably, into massive ledges, from beneath the Devonian system.
The succession consists in general of thin-bedded, schistose grauwacke, passing into quartzose sandstone, having more or less the character of slightly micaceous flagstones of brownish and greyish colours, very commonly having a ferruginous and sometimes a reddish tint. Occasionally these beds exhibit a passage into dark grey, slightly micaceous flagstones with rippled surfaces, separated by argillaceous “ way-boards,” and they frequently contain a sufficient quantity of calcareous matter to constitute seams of impure limestone.
In these rocks we find a class of fossils entirely distinct from those forms which approach the carboniferous types, and of which we were gradually losing the traces as we passed through the intermediate or Devonian strata. The fossils here predominating are, several species of the genus Pterincea of Gold- fuss (the Avicula of the upper Silurian rocks), one of which can scarcely be distinguished from the Avicula reticulata. The genus Homalonotus also prevails among the same rocks, along with a great profusion of a small species of Orthis, a genus eminently characteristic of the Silurian system, together with new forms of Spirifer unknown in the overlying system.
Black Slates of Wissenbach.
Besides the above-mentioned fossiliferous flagstones, certain strata are interpolated between the true Devonian rocks and the “ older grauwacke,” which in some districts on the left bank of the Rhine consist of flagstone, indurated shale and schist, with thin calcareous courses. Judging from their organic remains, these shales and slates must be considered as connected more with the Silurian than with the Devonian system. Of this peculiar group the transverse Westphalian sections, PI. XXIII. figs. 1 and 3, offer only the imperfect rudiments in certain beds of shale and schist immediately under the great limestone. We shall therefore describe the group as it appears in those tracts where it is most developed.
In following the strata upon their strike to Meschede and Brilon these schists become thicker and more important (assuming a distinct slaty cleavage transverse to the bedding), and are largely worked as roofing-slates. In that district we were not, however, fortunate enough to discover in them any organic remains : but in the country of Dillenburg, the black slates of Wissenbach, which we have shown to occupy the same geological position, are loaded with fossils.
These slates, which take their name from the village of Wissenbach, distinctly rise from beneath the Devonian limestones, repose upon grauwacke, and are quarried on the slopes of the hills which form the southern side of the longitudinal valley in which Wissenbach is situate.
From the description of the “ schistes argilleux de Wissenbach ” by M. Beyrich, we were quite unprepared to find such a beautiful example of slaty cleavage, oblique to the true bedding, as is offered by these strata. So completely, indeed, has the crystalline or slaty impress obliterated the lamime of deposit, that the latter are to be distinguished only by certain undulating and obscure lines, marked by crystallized pyrites, and inclined at about 15° or 20° to the S.S.E., while the jagged edges of the slates indicate a cleavage at the high angle of 60°, towards the same point of the compass. It is along these lines of pyrites, which mark the partings of the true beds, that the fossils have been found ; and the workmen, knowing their value, carry them to their houses in the village of Wissenbach, where we purchased a considerable number of them.
The first zoological character of these slates which strikes the observer, is the great profusion of Go- niatites. Associated with them are univalve shells (Euoniphali, &c.), many Orthoceratites (some of large size), Trilobites of three or four species, &c.
Besides the valuable collection of M. Dannenberg of Dillenburgt, we examined a series in the museum of Weilburg, collected by M. Sandeman ; and on the last occasion we were accompanied by our friend M. E. de Verneuil. It is from an inspection of all these fossils, as well as from our own collection, that we have come to the conclusion that these slates (underlying, as they do, the Devonian limestones of Oberscheld) may be considered to represent the upper beds of the Silurian system.
The limestones of Oberscheld, near Dillenburg, are clearly identical with those of Elberfeldt (the calcaire d strigocephale of Beyrich), of which we have treated at length when describing the banks of the Lahn ; but the fossils of the underlying slates of Wissenbach (see note, p. 255, and PI. XXIII. figs. G and 7) indicate beyond all doubt the commencement of another zoological type. The profusion of small Goniatites on the one hand might lead us to consider these slates as of younger age than the Ludlow rocks of England ; but the lobes of the species found here partake of the distinction first indicated by Von Buch, of a simple rounded lobe peculiar to the older rocks. Again, we found in this rock specimens of Cyrthoceratites and Orthoceras, as well as of certain Trilobites (Homalonotus, Calymene Blumenbachii, &c.), which are undistinguisbable from the known Silurian fossils ; we therefore group it with the upper part of that system.
We are aware that objections to this classification may be raised by those who draw their conclusions solely from the organic remains collected under the general name of “ Eifel fossils;” among which several species, similar to those that characterize the Strigocephalus limestone of Westphalia and Nassau, are found associated with some of the same forms which occur at Wissenbach. But when analysed, this objection loses its force. In every attempt to define geological subdivisions there must be a difficulty in marking off the lowest beds of one formation from the highest of that which is inferior to it. Those strata, for example, which have scarcely any development in one tract, are frequently found to expand as we follow them on their line of bearing; and with a change in their mineral character they are often seen to exhibit a peculiar change in the forms of organic life. Of this we have already adduced proof by tracing the lower zone of the carboniferous system through Westphalia (ante p. 231 et seq.) : and we now apply the same reasoning in explanation of our view respecting the slates of Wissenbach.
It has been shown, that in geological position these slates lie between limestones containing the same fossils as those of Elberfeldt and Iserlohn, and the fossiliferous grauwacke which constitutes the chief mountain masses of the right bank of the Rhine. It has also been stated, that on the Westphalian frontier, where the whole succession is clearly exhibited, these slates have no existence, and are there merely represented by a few courses of shale, in which we found no characteristic fossils. But these underlying shales expand vastly in their range towards the east ; and at Wissenbach, strata, occupying exactly the same position, assume a much more decided development, and contain that marked group of shells above mentioned which led us to our present conclusions. This view is, we think, in perfect harmony with all that we have written or observed respecting the development of the Palseozoic rocks.
In the sequel we shall endeavour to show, that the calcareous shale which underlies the great limestone of the Eifel (and we may here remark that the fossils of the shale and the limestone are always mixed together, and confounded in one group by the local collectors), is the equivalent of the black slates of Wissenbach.
In the Eifel, however, the lithological development of this group is small, being not much more expanded than in Northern Westphalia. The observer, therefore, who drew his conclusions only from the structure of the Eifel, might (as we shall show hereafter) place the group here described in the Devonian system ; while he who judged from the sections of Wissenbach and the right bank of the Rhine, and decided its age from the dominant fossil types, would consider it, as we do, to be Silurian.
The grits, psammites, and flagstones, &c., rising beneath the slaty groups last described, contain some fossils (e. g. Homalonoti, Calymene, &c.) approaching closely to upper Silurian types ; whilst other fossils of the same rocks resemble those which characterize the lowrer portions of the system.
Among the few fossils of this part of the series which are absolutely identical with our English forms, is the Pentamerus Knightii, found at Greifenstein, between Dillenburg and Wetzlar: but at this spot the section is unfortunately obscure, and the undulations and breaks are so considerable, as to destroy all sure indication of the exact geological place of the quartzose grits in which the shell occurs. They may perhaps have been heaved up by the basaltic eruptions of the spot, which have indeed converted large portions of the arenaceous deposits into quartz rock. 
Were it desirable, we could give many transverse sections through the lower groups of the Rhenish formations ; but the details of any one of them would be found to differ considerably from those of other parallel traverses made even at short distances. We therefore conceive that by a reference to one ideal section, in which the prominent data are generalized and grouped, we shall better explain the general relations of these older rocks than by entering into a multitude of incongruous details: and our list of fossils, with their localities, will assist in verifying the respective ages of the deposits, from whatever data they may have been previously made out.
In the tract near Dillenburg the grauwacke which rises from beneath the slates of Wissenbach, and occupies the high country extending north-westward in the direction of Siegen, is characterized by the same fossils which 'abound in it in so many other parts of the high regions of Nassau and Rhenish Prussia. Two species of Trilobites (one of which is not to be distinguished from Calymene Blumenbachii, and the other, which approaches closely to Homalonotus Knightii) are found in it along with numerous casts of shells. The shells are very abundant at Plaiger-Siihlbach, Wildenstein, and Sossenbergf, and are associated with several species of Orthis (one of which closely resembles 0. orbicularis), with Orthoceratites, and with several corals of the Silurian system, some of which (such as Favosites polymorpha) are also found in the overlying or Devonian rocks.
Again, there exist the clearest proofs, from the consistent evidence of sections, that other strata, inferior to the Wissenbach group, form the greater bulk of the grauwacke system of the Rhine. These consist of various bands of sandstone of reddish, yellowish, greyish, and whitish colours, alternating with hard grey schists, immediately underlying the fossiliferous flagstones and slates last described. Every traverse from the northern edge of Westphalia to the territory of Nassau demonstrates a similar succession. In ascending the banks of the river Lenne from Limberg to Altena, we are presented with a fine sequence of these rocks, with occasional seams of impure limestone, the whole rising from beneath the Devonian system. The same series is seen in passing from Schwelm to Meinershagen, concretionary bands of dark-coloured impure limestone occurring irregularly throughout the zone.
It appears, after a general view of the sections, that the vast group of fossilifcrous grauwacke lying beneath the schistose and calcareous beds last adverted to, is characterized not only by some of the fossils we have been enumerating and by several species of small Orthis closely allied to those of the Silurian rocks, but also by certain peculiar forms which are as yet unknown to us in England; e.g. by the Hysterolites of Schlotheim, and two species of Delthyris, the D. macroptera and D. microptera of Goldfuss.
In some of the lowest strata of this grauwacke, which appear in the environs of Siegen and also at Unkel and other places on the Rhine, we meet with several forms of Orthis (one of which has been recognized as Orthis Pecten, another as Orthis Jlabellulum, a third as Orthis rugosa) associated with a species of Terebratula, undistinguishable from Tcrebratula Stricklandii. This group of fossils seems rather to be characteristic of the low'er Silurian rocks.
If, however, we attempt to separate the grauwacke of the Rhenish provinces into formations, we meet with insurmountable difficulties; first, because we want distinct calcareous ledges or separating lines, each characterized by peculiar fossils (as in the typical country of the Silurian rocks of England) ; and secondly, because several of the same species of fossils, such as the Delthyris macroptera and D. microptera, and several of the small species of Orthis, are found throughout an enormous vertical thickness of strata.
While speaking of the thickness of strata, we have every possible desire to guard against the exaggerated interpretation which might be put upon our words or derived from the sections we describe. The great transverse fissure in these older rocks which offers a passage to the Rhine, in exposing the strata on its abrupt sides, convinced us of the vast thickness to which the strata must have been successively accumulated ; although at the same time it taught us that they have been subjected to many convolutions, breaks and repetitions. Making, however, every allowance for such phaenomena, as well as for the repeated interference of volcanic rocks (with evidences of which the region is replete), we were still enabled to detect certain dominant points of flexure, and to establish certain centres of elevation, by which the thickness of the fossiliferous grauwacke of the Rhine, which we place on the parallel of the Silurian system, is proved to be enormous.
The country around Siegen may be considered as one of the great domes of elevation of these provinces, the strata of which, after considerable undulations and disturbances, plunge both to the N.N.W. and S.S.E. On the north side they are covered by the upper bands of grauwacke, flagstone and impure limestone above noticed; and to the south they exhibit, as before explained, a similar ascending order into the country east of Dillenburg, where the grauwacke flagstones are surmounted by the black fossiliferous slates of Wissenbach, followed by the Devonian groups.
In a country so convulsed and so perforated by rocks of igneous origin, it would be indeed unreasonable to expect a perfect symmetry in all the details of the sedimentary deposits ; thus though several points of elevation may be observed upon the Rhine, one for example near Unkel, another west of Coblentz, and a third near Caub, between Coblentz and Bingen, none of these lines of disturbance can, we believe, be traced for any great distance into the country on either bank of the river. In short, we think that many of these parallel lines of dislocation are of short lateral extension, and have thus produced a number of undulations, and sometimes of complete reversals. If the most patient investigation of the rocks on the deep fissures of the Rhine fails to teach us more than this lesson, how hopeless must it be to attempt to draw secure conclusions from any evidence to be collected in the interior of this region, where the natural fissures are much less clear and persistent!
These considerations lead us to say a few words upon some of the apparent anomalies of this country, and to endeavour to give some account of the position into which the various rock-masses have been thrown. The section (PI. XXIII. fig. 4) exhibits the Silurian Rocks rising into mountain masses with a steady dip to the N.N.W., which carries them beneath the Devonian and carboniferous rocks ; and this dip is persistent along the whole of the Westphalian frontier, as far as it is flanked by the productive coal-field: but these transverse sections, if continued further across the mountains towards the south, conduct us through certain undulations to a great irregular central area, which forms a kind of mineral axis to the whole region. From this wide area of elevation, which may be considered, in a general way, to range around the towns of Olpe, Drolshagen and Siegen, the dip is reversed to the S.S.E. And if a section be extended from any of the last-mentioned places to the Taunus (a distance of not less than sixty miles), by Dillenburg, or Wetzlar, or Dietz, the geologist will find the great southerly dip so very prevalent, that were he to depend upon that criterion alone as a proof of superposition, he would infallibly be led to a conclusion respecting the thickness of the whole series that would he utterly beyond belief. But in this way he would be involved in a gross error; for it has been shown that beds of limestone, schist and sandstone, forming a peculiar mineral group, and having a peculiar group of fossils, are (notwithstanding the prevailing south-eastern dip) repeated at certain intervals along the supposed lines of section.
Thus the Devonian rocks and some of the lowest members of the carboniferous series, are (as we have already shown) clearly exposed near Dillenburg and Herborn, amid many trappean eruptions and countless alternations of schaalsteins or contemporaneous plutonic rocks. Continuing the section southwards, the prevalent dip is still to the S.S.E., and yet rocks containing the Pentamerus Knightii, and therefore most probably Silurian, are thrown up on one point, overlaid again by the Devonian limestones of the Lahn, and containing the same fossils which we find in the zones of Brilon and Dillenburg.
Again, starting from the banks of the Lahn, where the limestones are in a state of marble, charged with numerous unequivocal fossils identical with those of the Westphalian limestone, and loaded with pure Devonian species, the dip is still to the S.S.E., an inclination which is persistent throughout nearly the whole tract extending to the foot of the Taunus. So that here again, if we trusted to vertical sections, (in a country too where trap rocks, both contemporaneous and intrusive, are for ever protruding to the surface), we should necessarily arrive at the conclusion, that the quartz rocks of the Taunus and the associated strata are not of higher antiquity than the carboniferous epoch. The fossils, however, which we collected in the slaty schists along the northern flanks of the Taunus, at Idstein, Usingen, &c., contradict this conclusion; and the quartzose rocks of the Hunds- riick (a continuation of the Taunus) afford, as we shall show, similar and still more decisive evidence. These fossils are unquestionably of the same age as those of some members of the older fossiliferous grauwacke in the regions above described : and hence we are compelled to conclude, that many masses of the strata between the Lahn and the Taunus are in an inverted position ; since the Devonian limestones, repeated in several parallels, seem to plunge under the Silurian grauwacke.
Though we do not wish to fatigue our readers by emptying our note-books of their details, yet having made so many traverses, we may advert to some additional illustrative districts. The Aggerthal, for example, along great part of which the new chaussee from Cologne to Berlin passes, lays open a considerable variety of beds of arenaceous grauwacke, schist, hard flagstone, and dull grey-coloured limestone. The limestone, occurring in large concretionary masses, is often loaded with corals. The shales which alternate with limestones are sometimes charged with the same shells that characterize the Silurian grauwacke in the country which surrounds the Eifel on the left bank of the Rhine; viz. the same small species of Orthis which occurs at Priim ; the small variety of the Terehratula aspera, so characteristic of the Silurian system (T. affinis, Sow.); a species of small spinose Producta, identical with a shell found in the beds under the Eifel limestone at Cronenburgh and at Munster Eifel; and two Spirifers common in the same tract. 
The above species, with the coral Favosites polymorpha, are singularly abundant at Meinershagen and to the north of Gummersbach. Near Engelskirchen the flagstones, sometimes passing into calciferous grits, are largely quarried, and contain the Orthis, &c.
Between Aggerthal and the Westphalian coal-field, we met with many fossils, especially in the grauwacke north of Marienheide. They consist of several new forms, including the cast of a very remarkable, large Terehratula. And we ought not to omit the fossiliferous limestones, alternating with schist and sandstone, which are seen in vertical and highly inclined strata on the banks of the Lenne above Altena: at Esel for example, where we detected the Caly- mene macrophthalma, with flattened Orthoceratites in impure, black, slaty limestone ; and also near Neunrade, where the beds teem with magnificent specimens of corals.
The Silurian rocks of this region are, however, distinguished by one organic character, which has never been observed in deposits of the same age in England. In the Rhenish provinces the remains of land-plants occur at intervals throughout nearly the whole of the ancient series in which any animal remains have been observed. From what we had observed in Devonshire, where we found the sandstone rocks beneath the culm-measures to contain plants bearing some analogy to those of the carboniferous epoch, we were led to believe that in extending our researches to distant parts of Europe we might find the equivalents of the Devonian, and perhaps even of the Silurian system, to be also characterized by a Flora as well as by a Fauna. With the development of vegetable forms among the Rhenish rocks we find, as might be expected, traces of carbonaceous matter, one example of which has been noted in our description of the Devonian limestones near Bensberg. In the Aggerthal we again detected thin courses of carbonaceous matter ; and they occurred in the vicinity of sandstone, in which we had observed impressions of stems and leaves. All the ancient rocks on both banks of the Rhine near Bonn are similarly characterized by plants. These forms are generally ill preserved, and have not yet been specifically determined by competent botanists: but it is of the highest interest to make out whether they are, or are not, identical with any species known in the overlying deposits.
One of the most instructive sections to exhibit the natural relation of the flagstones, sandstones, and schists, to the Devonian limestones, is seen in passing from Dietz on the Lahn to the baths of Ems. In this traverse we first see an enormous development of glossy slate, flagstones, &c., rising from beneath the limestone of Dietz. These rocks are penetrated by many lead veins, and are in parts much altered by the intrusion of porphyry and basalt; but the steady dip to the E.S.E., displayed in the rocky cliffs east of Obernhof (though followed by some undulations between that village and Nassau), proves that the whole of this slaty group is interposed between the Dietz limestone with Devonian fossils, and the Silurian shelly grauwacke of the baths of Ems.
Near the latter place, at Kemmenau and various other quarries, strong beds of quartzose grauwacke, sometimes completely arenaceous and alternating with schists, contain occasionally impure calcareous courses. In these are often found many fossils, which, as a group, are unquestionably Silurian. Among them we collected three species of Homalonotus, one of which approaches in character the H. Knightii, and we shall hereafter notice them as occurring in the flagstones of the Ahr, at Martelange, &c., on the left bank of the Rhine; another is what the Germans have published as Asaphus Hausmanni, and a third is largely tuberculated on the body like Homalonotus Herschelii, Sil. Syst. The same forms of Trilobite occur in the grauwacke which rises from beneath the slates of Wissenbach. These fossils, near theLahn mouth, are associated with two or three species of Orthis (one of which is very near to Leptrena or Orthis lata), and also with the very prevalent fossils Dclthyris macroptera and D. microptera; they also occur in the arenaceous and schistose beds, but chiefly in the form of casts. 
Although we do not find among these fossil casts more than two or three forms which clearly belong to the published Silurian types of Great Britain, we see at once, that the group, as far as regards its fossil shells, is not merely distinct from the carboniferous system, but also from the Devonian. A glance at the plates and lists of the fossils establishes this point.
Beds, we consider of a still older date, which rise out on the Moselle and at Unkel on the Rhine, contain a vast profusion of a few species of the genus Orthis, and assume very much the characters of the lower Silurian rocks, with which they have one or two species in common. But, as we have before said, the absence of clear subdividing lines, and the great dislocations and convulsions of these tracts, forbid us to dwell further upon the descending order, and to restrict ourselves to broad distinctions. All that we can say with certainty is, that, of the fossil beds in question, those which contain the Homalonoti, Orthocerata, and Pteri- nece, indicate the upper Silurian division : while those which are marked by the prevalence of the genus Orthis indicate the lower. The peculiar shells Delthyris macroptera and D. microptera occur through such a deep vertical range of the series, that they cannot be considered as the types of any one portion of it. We conclude therefore, that the slates of Wissenbach, and the shales and schists of similar age which underlie the Devonian limestones on the left bank of the Rhine, may represent a portion of the upper Silurian group of England; and that the fossiliferous grauwacke of the Rhine may as a whole stand both for all the middle and lower parts of the Silurian system.
The presence of certain Trilobites and Orthoceratites, both in the Wissenbach slates and in the underlying grauwacke, teach us that some of the races of animals entombed in these rocks lived through very long periods of time. Again, we repeat that the lithological development of these deposits does not permit us to subdivide them into any well-marked physical groups ; and hence they are, both lithologically and zoologically, much less distinct than the Silurian system of England.
Eruptive Rochs, Mines, Dislocations, fyc.
The short account we have given of the remarkable association of sedimentary and trappean rocks in the neighbourhood of Dillenburg, may help to explain the relations of similar rocks in other mineralized districts on the right bank of the Rhine. In the tracts north of Siegen and Olpe, bosses of porphyry and greenstone protrude at several points. At Bilstein, N.E. of Olpe, the porphyry throws off the fossiliferous strata thus :
To the south of the Aggerthal, the mining country near Runderoth is surrounded by trappean rocks. According to our friend M. Erbreich, this tract contains arenaceous flagstones and hard dark-coloured limestones (like those we saw in Aggerthal) ; but so contorted and mineralized, that the traces of bedding are often lost, and the intervals between the masses are filled with great deposits of iron ore. To the south-west of this tract are the celebrated Sieben-Gebirge, forming the most marked eruptive centre of the whole region, concerning whose basaltic and trachytic rocks volumes have been published*. In the districts of the Lahn, but particularly on its southern bank, the protrusions of porphyry, greenstone, &c., are most abundant ; and, as before said, they are accompanied by numerous springs of mineral waters. The quartz rocks of the Taunus, which form the boundary of this mineralized region, represent upon a great scale that which is seen repeatedly in smaller areas—the conversion of arenaceous strata into quartz rock. This change we consider, in common with M. Von Buch, as due to plutonic agency.
In a country so much perforated by igneous matter, which has in many places communicated a new mineral impress to whole districts, we are prepared to admit any change, however great, from the original position of the strata. In the second part of this paper, we shall allude to the great inclined basins of Liege, and to the methods employed by Professor Dumont of deducing the original order of superposition from the symmetrical arrangement of the groups up a horizontal section. This method might be applied in Northern Westphalia. But in certain parts of Nassau, where the formations are contorted on a great scale and often inverted—shattered by the protrusion of countless trappean rocks, and so mineralized that the very beds can no longer be distinguished—buried under tertiary deposits or covered by alluvial drift,—in many such places it would, we believe, defy the most patient observer to collect the disjecta membra of the country, and arrange them in any approach to symmetry.
Even in those districts where the igneous rocks have not risen much to the surface, the strata are continually seen in the most convulsed positions. The banks of the Lahn between the baths of Ems and the mouth of the river offer striking examples of contorted strata. In one spot near Horein, laid open by a new road, we found the harder arenaceous beds wedging out among the slates, while the whole mass was highly inclined, broken, and contorted.	
Our woodcut represents these appearances on the face of a rock not more than thirty feet high and fifty feet wide.
At the iron works still lower down the Lahn, the fossiliferous flagstones are in vertical masses, the higher ends of which stand up like prisms of basalt; and the faces of the beds, showing the strike to be N.N.E. and S.S.W., are nearly at right angles to the general bearing of the country.	.
At Ehrenbreitstein the fortress stands upon beds dipping from 50° to 60° to the north; while the little forts a few hundred yards to the south of it are separated by a great fault, and are on beds which are almost horizontal. Further north the strata are violently contorted and nearly vertical.
These are examples, on a small scale, of the dislocations to which the rocks above described have been subjected. But it would be idle for us to accumulate many such, as they recur perpetually. We will, however, illustrate by a woodcut one more example of contortion and fracture, taken from the banks of the Moselle opposite Braideburg. Beds of arenaceous and slaty grauwacke alternate, and are violently contorted; and in one part of a lofty cliff they are broken off and covered transversely by another series of slaty beds of the same age.
The dislocations, such as are here noticed, and still more the contortions on a vast scale, which have inverted whole tracts of country, would have thrown such difficulties in our way, that we could not have attempted to place, even in an approximate order, the formations above described, had not the less disturbed sections in a part of Westphalia given us the master-key to the true succession of the sedimentary Palseozoic rocks of these provinces.
In traversing the Rhenish tracts, we repeatedly noticed the overlying tertiary deposits of sand, conglomerate, and brown coal, often associated (as in the Westerwald around Rennerod, &c.) with great tabular eruptive masses of basalt ; but it is not our object to treat of these deposits, and they have been elaborately described by Professor Noggerath and other German authors. Our own countryman, Mr. Horner, has given us some new views concerning both their contents and their relations to the interpolated igneous rocks near Bonn. It is enough for our present purpose simply to state, that between these recent tertiary formations and the Palseozoic rocks, all connecting links, in the form of intermediate secondary strata, are entirely wanting in the mountainous provinces of this part of Germany.
PART II.
We now proceed to describe the older formations on the left bank of the Rhine, including under that name,—1st. All the formations between the great coal-field of Belgium and the south-eastern flanks of the Ardennes. 2ndly. The rocks of a corresponding age which extend from the coal-field of Liege to the Eifel. 3rdly. Those from the ridge of the Eifel to the chain of the Hundsruck. The great tract of country we are considering is bounded to the north-west by the coal-fields of Li&ge and Namur; to the S.W. and S. by the secondary rocks of the upper Meuse, and a part of the basin of the Moselle; to the S,E. by the great Saarbriich coal-field of the Palatinate; and to the E. and N.E. by the valley of the Rhine between Bingen and Bonn. It would hardly have been possible for us during one summer to make out the natural groups of rocks, and their relative age, in such a great and intricate country ; but this task had already been accomplished by Professor Dumont, as far as regards the successive groups between Namur and the chain of the Ardennes on one side, and between Li&ge and the country of the Eifel on the other. It is only in describing the formations between the Eifel and the Hundsruck, and the various groups of rock which appear on the left bank of the Rhine between Bonn and Bingen, that we have to rest chiefly on our own personal observations.
Carboniferous Rocks of Belgium.
The coal-field of Belgium, like the coal-field of Westphalia, is bounded to the north by overlying cretaceous and tertiary deposits: but in endeavouring to connect the respective coal-fields with the inferior formations, we meet with incomparably greater difficulties in Belgium than are presented by the traverses through the regularly descending sections of the parts of Westphalia we first examined. These difficulties arise out of the enormous derangements of the strata; for not only are they violently contorted; but being often elevated through vertical angles of more than 90°, their relative position, as seen on the natural sections, become inverted, and we can no longer trust our ordinary criterion of superposition. For example, in crossing the Ardennes, we found between Arlon and Bastogne a prevailing dip to the S.S.E.; but, after reaching what we at first supposed the centre of the chain, we in vain looked for a mineral axis indicated by a reversed dip. The prevailing dip continued the same even to the confines of the Belgian coal-field; nor did the difficulty end there, for, with local exceptions, the whole southern skirt of the Li&ge coal-field is in a reversed position. Hence we might establish a series of vertical sections ; from which, if we had no other evidence to rest on, we might infer that the whole coal-field of Liege was inferior to mountain limestone, and the terrain anthraxifere of Dumont; and this system again inferior to all the slate rocks composing the chain of the Ardennes. And how are we to rid ourselves of this monstrous conclusion ?
The answer to this question is given in the details published by Professor Dumont, and to them we must refer. But we may be permitted briefly to touch upon it, not only as a subject of great importance, but as one which admits of very imperfect illustration among the less disturbed sections of England.
When strata assume a basin-shaped arrangement, we generally find them in this Island dipping towards a centre, which is within the superficial limits of the basin (fig. 10 a.); and a line drawn near the centre of such basin at right angles to the beds composing it would be nearly in a vertical position. Such a line may be called the transverse axis; and such basins (around which the forces of elevation must have acted with nearly equal intensity) may be called upright basins. But we are under no necessity to limit the forces of elevation (or of subsidence, for the remark applies to both) in this manner ; and we can readily suppose elevatory forces to move the masses on one side through a vertical angle of more than 90°; while, on the other, the corresponding masses are only moved through a small angle. Still we have a basin-shaped arrangement: the lines of dip converge towards a centre, which is, however, nolongercon- fined to the superficial limits of the basin; and the transverse axis will be more or less inclined to the horizon. Such a one may therefore be called an inclined basin (fig. 10 b.') ; and it is perfectly obvious that vertical sections taken from opposite sides of it will appear directly to contradict one another.
But, in addition to the vertical sections, every country gives us also, in greater or less perfection, a series of, what we may call, horizontal sections, by help of which the original superposition may often be determined: for it is obvious that, however great and complicated the contortion of any conformable series of strata, they must appear on the horizontal section in the actual juxtaposition they had before their disturbance. Hence they will appear at the actual surface in a kind of symmetrical arrangement, out of which we may determine a true consecutive geological series; and if we have any means of determining the true relations of the highest or lowest groups, we at once determine the true relations of the whole series. Thus M. Dumont, by the careful examination of natural sections, determined a number of natural mineralogical groups, and following them on their lines of strike, he succeeded in placing them in symmetrical position on the map, or horizontal section. Considered in this way, the coal-field of Liege became only a very complicated case of an oblique basin, or series of basins; and the same groups of rocks which, on the south of the field, seemed to repose on the coal measures, were seen, on its north side, to rise (in their true natural order) from beneath them. This mode of investigating the relation of contiguous groups of strata is obviously not confined to mineral basins, but admits of very general application. And before we quit the subject we may remark, that the evidence of superposition, obtained by this laborious method, cannot long be in conflict with that derived from vertical sections. For violent dislocations, such as we are considering, are but of limited extent; and as soon as we have passed beyond them, the formations are seen in their natural order, and the superposition becomes at once defined by the phaenomena of a single vertical transverse section.
§ 2. Successive Groups between the Coal-field of Liege and the Ardennes, fyc.
Leaving the Belgian coal-field, let us next consider the successive groups of strata on the side of the Ardennes, and along the sections from the neighbourhood of Liege to the Eifel. This coal-field forms the first terrain of M. Dumont, and hy whatever line we make our traverse from it to the centre of the Ardennes, we find it succeeded by a second group of strata, the terrain anthraxifere of that author, which is composed as follows :—
An upper limestone (the mountain limestone of England).
A group of flagstones and earthy slates (systeme quartzo-schisteux superieur).
A lower limestone (sysfebwe calcareux inferieur).
A series of grits, flagstones, and slates, of more complicated structure than No. 2, and sometimes having subordinate masses of coarse conglomerate (systeme quartzo-schisteux inferieur).
This terrain anthraxifere ranges on the side of the Ardennes symmetrically with the coal-field, but is not limited by it; as its lower members extend far beyond the bounds of the true carboniferous strata.
The preceding terrain passes, by absolutely imperceptible gradations, into a third group of strata (the systeme ardoisier superieur of M. Dumont), occupying a regular zone on the horizontal section.
Again, this third group is succeeded by a fourth (the systeme ardoisier inferieur of Dumont), composed of fine roofing slates, alternating with great beds of quartzite, of more ancient aspect than the preceding, and forming the central mass of the Ardennes, as proved by following the respective systems on their lines of strike.
In the very centre of the Ardennes, and surrounded by the ordinary rocks of the 4th group, are some slates of unusually crystalline structure, and containing in some places an incredible quantity of small crystals of octohedral magnetic iron ore ; in other places numerous crystals of ottrelite, or numerous red stains, apparently derived from some decomposing ferriferous mineral. These peculiar slates, and the associated quartzites, are placed by M. Dumont in a 5th group. Led by the physical structure of our own country, and the fact that beds of porphyry appear among them in the great gorges of the Meuse, we should rather consider them as a lower and altered portion of roofing slates of the Ardennes. This is, however, a question of little moment; for these crystalline slates form a geological centre ; and in whatever direction we take our departure from them, the successive groups (as far as they are exhibited) are in the ascending order of the series above given.
For example, if from this centre we ascend the gorges of the Meuse towards Mezieres, we pass in succession over the 4th and 3rd groups, when the series is interrupted by the unconformable junction of secondary strata. If, on the contrary, we take any line of traverse down the basin of the Meuse, toward the Belgian coal-field, we cross in regular ascending order the several groups of deposits (before enumerated), ending with the carboniferous system. Now these groups or systems are arranged symmetrically, are conformable to, and pass into, one another. They can therefore only belong to a consecutive series of deposits ; and as we are certain of the relative ages of the carboniferous system, and that which is next in order, we at once conclude that we have from that system, to the very centre of the Ardennes, a true descending section. And thus we bring the geological sequence into harmony with the mineralogical phaenomena; which never could have been done, for reasons already stated, by examining the superposition of the beds on any one line of traverse.
The central crystalline schists, above mentioned (roclies aimantiferes, &c., of M. Dumont), do not form any distinct continuous ridge, but break out here and there, nearly along the prevailing line of strike, and with the relations above indicated. Their last appearance towards the N. E. is in a wild mountainous tract near Recht, a village eight or ten miles south of Malmedy; and taking these slates as a centre, if we make traverses from them to any part of the Li&ge coal-field, we cross the 4th, 3rd, and 2nd groups, above enumerated, and so pass into the 1st or carboniferous system. The groups are conformable, continuous, and pass insensibly one into another. They must therefore belong to an uninterrupted geological series ; and we determine the superposition, as before, not by the evidence of vertical sections, but even in some cases in direct opposition to it; for the magnificent sections seen in the various gorges, as we approach the coal-field of Li&ge, generally exhibit an inverted series.
In making another traverse from the same geological centre, near Recht, to the limestone of the Eifel, we cross, in regular ascending order, the two zones of roofing slate (groups 4 and 3) ; and then, after passing over the lowest division (systeme quartzo-schisteux infe'rieur), finally arrive at the lower limestone of Dumont’s second system (terrain anthraxifere). Thus we have another proof of the truth of the greater part of our geological sequence; and, as far as the section is complete, we obtain also a new proof of the true order of superposition : for on the Eifel side the beds are no longer inverted ; and the evidence derived from considerations of symmetry in the horizontal distribution of the mineral masses is in perfect accordance with that which is given by the clear vertical sections.
So far we have been explaining the views of Prof. Dumont by applying them to lines of section which we personally examined. With very limited exceptions we adopt his successive mineral groups ; and we think, beyond all shadow of doubt, that he has (somewhat in the manner pointed out) determined their true order of superposition, which we shall therefore assume at once as a matter proved. Had not his methods been so very different from those we commonly have recourse to in this country, we should not so long have dwelt upon them ; and we can only further refer our readers to his published works. Our next object must be to bring these several groups or systems into comparison with their British equivalents ; and this must be done chiefly on the evidence of fossils.
Description of the successive Groups.
We need not dwell on the carboniferous system of Belgium, because there are no doubts respecting its relations. For the same reason we may pass over the upper limestone of the terrain anthraxifere> as it is the undoubted equivalent of the English carboniferous limestone. It may seem strange to an English geologist, that this limestone should have been grouped in a system inferior to the carboniferous: but in Belgium we have no beds of coal alternating with the limestone, and forming a passage into the richer and higher part of the coal-field ; and the upper and lower limestones have so many analogies, especially in lithological characters, that, with reference only to Belgium, we think this classification by no means unnatural. It is hardly necessary for us to add, that, as English geologists, we should of course strike off the upper limestone from the terrain antkraxifere, and group it with the carboniferous system.
The next descending group is the systeme quartzo-sckisteux superieicr, which we must describe very briefly, as our limits allow of very few details. It is separable into two very distinct members,— an upper and a lower. The upper division is chiefly characterized by an open-grained, yellowish sandstone (psammite de Condroz), sometimes passing into a hard grey micaceous flagstone, not unlike a coal- measure flagstone. The yellowish beds are meagre to the touch, and are generally rather soft and earthy, and have subordinate bands of greenish grey indurated shales or mudstones: among them also are rarely found some bands of a rotten cellular psammite, with many casts of fossils, among which we at once distinguish Terebratulce, three or four species of Spiriferce, and small investing corals. The higher parts of this upper division are generally harder and thicker-bedded than the lower; but on approaching the mountain limestone they are seen to alternate with courses of shale. The shales also begin to alternate with beds of limestone; and the two systems are thus linked together by a gradual passage, showing that the deposits were absolutely continuous. A few obscure impressions of plants are found in this upper division ; and its thickness in the neighbourhood of the Chateau d’Halloy may be about 1500 feet. As some of its fossils cannot be distinguished from those of the carboniferous system, into which it forms a true passage; and as it does not contain, as far as we know, a single Ludlow rock fossil, it is impossible to consider it as older than the upper part of the old red sandstone, and indeed it is very doubtful whether some English geologists would not arrange it with the mountain limestone.
The lower division of this system (systeme quartzo-schisteux superieur) is also composed of alternating beds of psammite, and of an indurated shale or earthy schist; but the latter is more abundant than the former; and indeed this whole inferior group is characterized by the great quantity of greenish-grey, or dirty greyish-green, earthy schist or mudstone, extremely resembling many of the most characteristic varieties of Ludlow rock. Its whole thickness must be very great, though difficult to compute correctly from the number of undulations. Through the intervention of beds of hard grey sandstone it passes, in some places, into the upper division of yellow psammite (above described) : and near the same part of the series are sometimes seen calcareous bands with numerous organic remains, especially Terebratulae and Spirifers. Still lower in this division (for example, on the road from Liege to Spa, and on the road from Liege to Marche-en-Famenne) are found calcareous bands, and beds of calcareous shale, sometimes of a reddish colour, with many calcareous concretions, and associated with these are numerous organic remains. The species are enumerated in the accompanying lists. But we may observe, by the way, that neither in the yellow psammites of the upper division, nor on any part of the calcareous and fossiliferous earthy schists of the lower, did we find a single Upper Silurian fossil. Coupling this fact with the passage of the upper part of the formation into the mountain limestone, we reject any inference which may be drawn from a mere mineral resemblance of the lower beds to certain portions of the Ludlow rock ; especially when we consider how inconstant are these mineral characters in our own country, and how utterly unlike the upper Silurian rocks of Westmorland are to those of Shropshire, Herefordshire, &c.
Having thus, we think, proved that the second member of the terrain anthraxifere of Prof. Dumont is clearly not the equivalent of the Ludlow rock of the British Silurian system, we now proceed to notifce the two inferior divisions, which are considered by him as the equivalents of the Wenlock limestone and Caradoc sandstone. The lower limestone of Belgium rises immediately from beneath the formation last described, without any break of continuity or any appearance of interrupted sequence. It is a formation well defined in character and of great thickness. It is distinguished from the mountain limestone by its position, and partly also by its structure; for it is, on the whole, closer grained, and has often a kind of scaly fracture, resembling, in that respect, certain varieties of South Devon limestone. It sometimes also puts on a kind of slaty structure, often seen in old limestones alternating with schistose rocks, but very seldom found in true mountain limestone. It is also entirely distinguished from that limestone by its corals (Favosites polymorpha, Stromatopora concentrica, &c.) ; in which respect it is identical with the South Devon limestone, and also with the great lower limestone of Westphalia, described in the former part of this paper. Its colours are however very variable ; and it has dark carbonaceous beds (hence its name anthraxifere') which burn to a white lime, and are not distinguishable from common varieties of carboniferous limestone : and moreover it has, in a few places, like that limestone, thin- bedded and close-grained masses of a dark colour and conchoidal fracture, which are polished for black marble. Such is the position, and such are the prevailing characters of the lower Belgian limestone. Its fossils are given by M. Dumont, and have been discussed by Mr. Lonsdale ; and appeared to us unequivocally the same (considered as a group) with those of the great lower Westphalian limestone (of Elberfeldt, Iserlohn, &c.). Hence all the arguments by which we endeavoured to prove the age of the latter, may here be applied to determine the epoch of the former. In short, it is in position on the sections, in its structure, in its great extent, and in its group of fossils, a true Devonian limestone: and we shall further recur to this subject, after we have, in the progress of this paper, noticed the Eifel limestone.
We must in the next place shortly notice the lowest formation of the anthraxiferous system of M. Dumont. It is essentially composed of psammites and schists. The psammites pass into beds of hard, siliceous flagstone and strong beds of gritstone; and in some places (chiefly in the upper portions of the formation) into beds of coarse conglomerate, which are sometimes of a grey, and sometimes of a brownish red colour. The schists pass into arenaceous shales alternating with flagstones; and at their lower boundary- pass into slaty masses which blend themselves with, and are inseparable from, the upper slate rocks of the next lower system (systeme ardoisier superieur of M. Dumont).
Considered as a whole, this formation is harder and more siliceous than the upper quartzose schists above described. It is also distinguished (though to this remark there are many exceptions) by the red colour, not merely of the conglomerates above noticed, but also of the flagstones and shales, which sometimes are both red and variegated. These colours are most prevalent within a certain distance of the limestone, and disappear in the descending sections. The flagstones and associated arenaceous shales are, however, often of a grey, yellowish-grey, and greenish-grey colour, and sometimes pass into the condition of an earthy mudstone, like the upper Silurian rocks of England. Occasionally (though not commonly) traces of an oblique cleavage may be seen among the more slaty masses, and the whole is often divided by a double system of joints. And we may remark, that such joints cut through the conglomerate beds by regular plane surfaces which continue their course through the imbedded pebbles without any interruption ; thereby showing that the force which produced the joints was of the nature of a mechanical tension (by what cause produced we do not now inquire), and not derived from any direct molecular action of the particles composing the jointed masses.
The formation is of great thickness in Belgium ; but, as far as we are able to interpret the sections, it is .vastly thicker, and also more calcareous and fossiliferous, in the country south of Westphalia, and also in the country surrounding and dipping under the Eifel limestone.
For the fossils of this formation (which are difficult to procure, and of which we brought away hardly a single specimen) we must refer to the lists of 1ST. Dumont; and also to our lists, derived from rocks of the same age, beyond the limits of the country we are now considering. As we can show that the formation immediately below it is unquestionably Silurian, we are justified in placing it between the undoubted Devonian and Silurian rocks. But where shall we draw the line of separation ? We shall endeavour to find an answer to this question in evidence afforded by the sections of the Eifel and the Rhenish provinces, which are more complete. Meanwhile we may observe, that the mineral character of the red conglomerates which appear below the inferior limestone, formerly led M. Dumont (to whom we may add M. Rozet and other observers) to regard them as the representatives of our old red sandstone. We have not any great objections to this view; and adopting it hypothetically, we should place the conglomerates and the coarse hard beds which occur in the upper part of the formation we are now discussing at the base of the Devonian system (or old red sandstone). On this view, it follows that the inferior Belgian limestone and all the overlying deposits up to the base of the superior (or true mountain) limestone must represent the middle and upper portions of the old red sandstone. Nor do we think it any objection to this determination, that the assumed base line cuts through a natural mineralogical group, so as to place its upper and lower portions in two distinct systems; for the same objection may be made to the zoological subdivisions of the deposits in the Paris basin, as well as to some of the lines separating the secondary formations of England.
We endeavour to show that the transition formations of the Continent, commencing with the mountain limestone and descending to the lowest fossiliferous deposits, form one vast uninterrupted sequence, with no universal and well-defined subdivisions : and we also attempt to show that the natural groups of fossils follow a similar law. The mineralogical groups and the fossil groups being both founded in nature, and presenting an actual sequence, agree in the general and broad conclusions to which they lead us; but they naturally and necessarily differ when we come to questions relating to minute subdivisions.
The actual sequence of the deposits, and their relative order in an ascending or descending series, can only he made out, in the first instance, by the examination of true mineral groups and natural sections. And such groups are of inestimable value in making out the relations of physical regions, either actually continuous, or not very widely separated from one another. But as all such groups are the results (at least in a great measure) of mere local mechanical causes, we might infer hypothetically (what indeed we know by experience), that even among formations undoubtedly of the same age, an agreement in the minute subdivisions is not to be looked for. We do not find such an agreement between the subdivisions of the Silurian system in Herefordshire, Shropshire, and North Wales ; still less do we find any exact mineralogical agreement of these subdivisions, as developed in a part of Lancashire and Westmorland.
In questions of doubt, the mind naturally seizes on the first analogies that present themselves ; and we think it was perfectly natural for Monsieur D’Halloy and Professor Dumont to classify the three lower members of their terrain anthraxifere respectively with the Ludlow, Wenlock and Caradoc formations of the Silurian system : and we were so far misled by the beautiful analogy which seemed to be presented by the mineralogical development of the region, that we were disposed to adopt this view after our first examination of the Belgian sections, though it threw our previous classifications on the right bank of the Rhine into great difficulties. Our present classification not merely relieves us from these difficulties, but appears to be based on a sound induction from all the facts of the case ; and with this remark we pass on to a brief consideration of the lower Belgian formations.
Upper Division of the Terrain ardoisier of the Ardennes, fyc.—This formation is, in its upper members, blended with the base of the formations already noticed, and its lower members graduate insensibly into the central and more crystalline slates of the Ardennes. It has been shown by Professor Dumont to occupy the position thus indicated; to be wrapped round the central slate rocks of the Ardennes; and in a similar position to surround the central masses that appear in the prolongation of that chain towards the Eifel. As our several traverses only tended to confirm the general justness of his views, we accept them without hesitation. But there is another question, what are the British equivalents of this formation ? In replying to it we can only appeal to our fossils, unfortunately very few in number, and to the fossil evidence offered us by Professor Dumont and some other geologists. But we shall afterwards confirm our views by an appeal to other evidence, derived from the fossils in analogous beds under the Eifel limestone; and by the general structure and relations of the Rhenish provinces (out of the limits of Belgium), in which fossils are more abundant.
In the first place, then, we found in several parts of this formation large winged Spirifers of species unknown in England, but analogous to forms which, on the right bank of the Rhine, we have shown to be associated with known Silurian fossils. For example, specimens of this kind have been found at Houffalize, Wiltz, Weidinza, Longwily, &c., places on the formation we are considering. Again, at Martelange, on the south flank of the Ardennes, and in this upper zone of slates, we find several species of fossils; e.y.
(1.) Beautiful starred Encrinites, like those (figured in our Devonian paper) which were found near Looe in Cornwall, in a rock considerably inferior to the Plymouth limestone*.
(2.) Two species of Orthoceras, and one we think identical with Orthoceras articulatum of the Ludlow rock.
(3.) A trilobite not easily distinguished from Homalonotus Knighiu of the Ludlow rock. 
These fossils (and some others which we saw in the museum of Namur through the kindness of Professor Cauchy) first led us to think that the slaty zone we are considering was partly Devonian and partly upper Silurian; we afterwards, however, modified our opinion, finding that certain forms found in only the highest part of the Silurian system in England, are more widely diffused, and descend into the lower part of it on the Continent. On the whole, we conclude, partly on direct evidence and partly on analogy, that the upper slate zone (sgsteme ardoisier superieur') of Belgium and the Ardennes (and with it we would also class the lower part of the formation immediately overlying it) is of the Silurian age, though its mode of development offers us no means of separating it into distinct groups ; and thus the whole fos- siliferous system, from the mountain limestone downwards, forms one connected and natural series.
It is in vain for us to enter on any details respecting the oldest slate rocks of the Ardennes, and of the country between Liege and the Eifel, as we have not obtained a single fossil from them. As, however, they form only the last term of a connected series and immediately succeed the Silurian system, we see no reason for placing them lower than the upper Cambrian system. Their mineral character opposes no difficulty to this view, as we know by the analogies presented by the slate rocks of our own country, how impossible it is to determine their age by mere considerations of mineral structure.
Before we quit the consideration of the Belgian rocks, we may, however, notice the beautiful structure of the old slates of Recht, which form the axis of the country south of Malmedyf. The slates are obtained by planes of cleavage distinct from the beds, and sometimes dipping to an exactly opposite point; and the true bedding is marked on the slates by the usual appearance of a stripe, or sedimentary line. In addition to the main cleavage there is in some of the quarries a distinct second cleavage, indicated by an infinite number of minute strice, which maybe traced even through the minutest portions of the slates. This shows that the strice and second cleavage were derived from a true molecular action, quite different from the mechanical tension which has so often produced large open joints. The second cleavage is not sufficiently perfect to produce any roofing slates, and indeed in some measure injures those obtained from the first and ordinary cleavage; for all the slates have a tendency to break off at the regular planes presented by the second cleavage. Large masses of the rock had, in some places, slid off in the quarries at one of the second cleavage planes; which, being highly inclined to the horizon and nearly transverse to the bedding, gave the appearance of regular dip-joints. But they are not joints in the common acceptation of the term, and they are cut at a small angle by nearly vertical true dip-joints; which, as usual, intersect both the beds and cleavage planes without deviating from their course. We have never remarked phenomena such as these in Cumberland, Lancashire, or North Wales; but in a previous paper we noticed similar (though in their kind less perfect) appearances on the coasts of Devonshire and Cornwall.
Eifel, Banks of the Rhine, Basin of the Moselle, fyc.
We have before stated, that if we commence with the oldest slate rocks near Recht, and make two ascending sections, one to the lower limestone of Belgium, and the other to the limestone of the Eifel, we pass through the same succession of depositsf. Hence we might conclude, on the general evidence derived from this physical structure (and the conclusion is also borne out by the fossils), that the two limestones are on the same parallel. On this point, indeed, there seems to be no difference of opinion. Now in the whole region, extending through the basin of the Moselle to the Hundsriick, and on the left bank of the Rhine from Bonn to Bingen, there are no repetitions of any great limestone groups; such as are seen in the Eifel, and on the other bank of the Rhine along the drainage of the Lahn, and in the mineral country of Dillenburg. In short, all the deposits of the regions above alluded to, on the left bank of the Rhine, are inferior to the Eifel limestone, which may therefore be assumed as a fixed point of departure in the descending sections.
One of the chief masses of this limestone occupies an irregular elliptical area, the longer axis of which extends from a point a little S. of Schonecken to a point about two or three miles N.E. of Miinster-Eifel, and is surrounded by the formations which are immediately inferior to it. Its true position is very clearly exhibited in a section we have drawn from the Schnee-Eifel to the hills of Schonecken. The limestone is not, however, expanded continuously through the whole elliptical area, but is thrown into violent undulations, which here and there bring the lower rocks to the surface; so that it becomes resolved into three or four distinct and irregular troughs (see Map, Plate XXIV. and Sections 12 and 14, PI. XXIII.), all presenting the same general relations.
Again, it has been pierced by comparatively modern volcanic vents, and is interrupted by volcanic cones and the remnants of streams of lava; and in some places, especially on its eastern limits, it is covered up for miles together by lava, cinders, scoria, and other volcanic ejections. But these materials, though they greatly add to the difficulty of making out the details of the country, do not disturb the general relations of the formations through which they have forced a way to the surface.
Near Miinster-Eifel, in consequence of the extreme contortions, all the formations, for several thousand feet of thickness and a range of several miles, are in a reversed position, as indicated in the woodcut.
This anomaly must have been produced by disturbing forces which acted during ancient periods, long anterior to the comparatively modern volcanic vents ; and as we follow the beds along their strike, the limestone is seen gradually to recover its natural position ; so that near Sotenich it occupies a trough as clearly defined as the one we have indicated near Prtim and Schonecken. 
The limestone is of very great thickness ; for on some of its outskirts there is a succession of great mural precipices, showing on one single spot several hundred feet of strata ; and how far such sections are from reaching the highest beds of the formation it is no easy matter to determine. The limestone is composed of two principal varieties, common limestone and dolomite; the former not to be distinguished in its mineral character from the great lower limestone of Westphalia and Belgium; the latter sometimes hard, cry-, stalline, and marked by many beautiful impressions of corals—sometimes cellular and without any distinct traces of bedding—occasionally like a mass that is half brecciated and half concretionary, and sometimes quite earthy and incoherent, so as to resemble the pulverulent beds in our English formations of magnesian limestone. As a general rule (to which, however, there may be exceptions), the dolomites are in the upper part of the series, occupying the central portions of the several troughs ; while on the outskirts of the formation we often see masses of unaltered and well-bedded limestone rising from beneath the great ridges of dolomite, and so forming the base of the troughs.
It is hardly possible to resist the impression that a great part of this formation has an altered structure; and when we remarked the numerous lofty cones of cellular and basaltic lava which studded many parts of the region—the great inverted cones breaking through the limestone, and containing cinders, scoria, and other indications of ancient volcanic vents—the great fissures in the Dolomites of Gerol- stein, through which streams of lava and masses of scoria have mounted to the surface—above all, when we considered the wide-spread volcanic products which for several leagues cover up the whole eastern limits of the formation, we at first thought that we had before us the obvious causes of all that complexity of mineral structure which we have noticed.
Subsequent observations induced us to modify this opinion ; for Dolomites occur at great distances from any of the modern volcanic vents. Moreover, these vents have produced a very small effect on the strike or inclination of the beds in any of the older formations. Hence it is probable, that the chief mineralization of the Eifel limestone took place during some of those early periods of plutonic disturbance, during which the older strata of the Rhenish provinces were elevated and contorted. Before we quit this subjective may remark, that the causes which mineralized the rocks of the Eifel may, perhaps, have driven off the carbonaceous matter they once contained ; for we find among them none of those black beds which are so frequent in the lower limestones of Belgium and Westphalia.
Many of the fossils of the Eifel limestone are well known, among which are found certain Silurian species. These are however chiefly derived from the inferior shales, which we have not yet noticed; and it is important that the fossils of the upper and lower portions should be kept distinct. M. Beyrich of Berlin, whom we have before quoted, saw the importance of this distinction ; and has, without any assumed hypothesis, and merely from the characters of the fossils, separated the limestones of Bensberg into two distinct formations. It is enough for us to observe in this place (referring for further evidence to our lists),—that the group of fossils in the Eifel limestone is Devonian—that we there find great masses containing Strigocephalus Burtini, and other well-known Westphalian species (which we never met with in the strata below the great Westphalian limestone)—and that nearly all the Silurian types which characterize the lower group are entirely wanting. We therefore place the great Eifel limestone on the parallel of the lower Westphalian and Belgian limestones, and consequently the lower part of the Devonian system. In this arrangement the conclusions derived from the sections and the groups of fossils are in harmony with one another.
The formation beneath the Eifel limestone is essentially the same, on whatever side we begin our examination.
We have first a series of shales more or less calcareous, alternating with the bands of limestone, and passing into the state of indurated marl. In its upper portion this group passes into, and blends with, the great overlying limestone. In its lower portion it begins to alternate with psammite and flagstone ; the alternating shales lose their marly character, become more meagre and arenaceous, and are occasionally of a reddish tinge. The same colours are not unusual in the flagstones. Here and there the marly beds, along with courses of limestone, reappear at considerable depths in the descending section ; but at length the formation passes into a vast deposit of flagstone and psammite, with bands of meagre shale and earthy schist repeated in many alternations.
The development of the series (though differing considerably from that of the corresponding deposits of Belgium) is almost exactly similar to that on the right bank of the Rhine under the lower Westphalian limestone; for there we have the same recurrence of thin calcareous bands, the same alternations and mineralogical characters, again and again repeated; so that one description might almost do for both. Near Daun, Pr'um, Cronenburg, Miinster-Eifel, and Euskirchen, there are clear sections, which prove that the strata underlie the great mass of limestone : and at these localities we found at least four species of Orthis, one of which approaches very closely to Orthis orbicularis, and another to Orthis or Leptwna lata, of the upper Silurian rocks. With these fossils are grouped certain Trilobites, which we cannot distinguish from published Silurian types, such as the Calymene Blumenbachii, C. macrophthalma, and two or three forms of Homa- lonotus, one of which resembles closely the H. Knightii. They are occasionally associated with the Delthyris macroptera and D. microptera, and with numerous Tentaculites. Thus the group we are describing is shown to be identical with that of the Lahn mouth, of Braubach, and of other places on the right bank of the Rhine, which we have considered as upper Silurian.
Notwithstanding therefore some difference of development, we are led (as we were on the other bank of the Rhine) to place this portion of our section in the upper part of the Silurian system. In this view, the upper marly shales can be regarded only as beds of passage, zoologically as well as mineralogically, between the Eifel limestone and the Silurian system. Now as many of the published Eifel fossils are derived from these marls, which contain an immense number of well-preserved organic remains, we need not wonder, on this explanation, at the occurrence of so many well-known Silurian types among these published Eifel lists.
The analogy between this and the corresponding group on the right bank of the Rhine, is still further maintained by the numerous obscure vegetable impressions which are found in both of them ; very seldom, however, in such a state as to give any hopes of determining their species.
We twice crossed the ridge between the north-eastern limits of the Eifel and the gorges of the Ahr, and we made three or four distinct traverses from the southeastern ridges of the Eifel to the basin of the Moselle. From the Moselle we made traverses across the Hundsriick ; and we endeavoured to connect our work together by an examination of the old rocks on the banks of the Moselle, and by repeated examinations of all the older rocks in the gorges of the Rhine between Bonn and Bingen. As a general result of these examinations, we may state, that we were not able, by any direct evidence of sections, to establish the order of superposition between the Eifel and the Hundsriick ; in which respect we, however, encountered no greater difficulties than we had met with in the Ardennes and on the right bank of the Rhine. But in course of these traverses we found a series of great mineral masses following one another nearly in the order we have already described.
Under the great fossiliferous group containing the red shales and psammites is an enormous development of slaty flagstones, earthy schist, and shale of yellowish-grey, greenish-grey, and bluish-grey colours ; sometimes blending themselves in structure with the upper group; sometimes passing into the condition of a coarse slate formation like the upper slates of the Ardennes,—not unusually presenting vegetable impressions, and occasionally bands marked with innumerable impressions of Encrinites, Corals, Orthidea, &c.
With these characters they appear in the gorges of the Lieser between Bleckhausen and Mander- scheid, often in vertical positions, or thrown into the most fantastical contortions,—in the gorges that descend toward the Moselle, between Daun and Lutzerath,—in the magnificent sections of the Ahr—and on both banks of the Rhine between Bonn and Andernach. Similar rocks, and with the same general suite of fossils, follow both banks of the Rhine above Coblentz; and near the mouth of the Lahn they are shown to plunge under the limestones of the Devonian system described in the former part of this paper.
Ln the escarpments near Braubach and the mouth of the Lahn these rocks are, as already stated, extremely fossiliferous; the long-winged Delthyris (Spirifer, Goldfuss) and the Homulonoti being abundant, and the whole suite agreeing with that which we have already described, and considered as characteristic of the Silurian system in the Rhenish provinces.
Near Boppart, south of the mouth of the Lahn, the mineral system of the Rhine changes its character; not by any sudden transition nor in any well-marked order of superposition, but among numberless contortions, and by insensible gradations; so that above Obcrwesel the whole has more the character of a slate formation than of an arenaceous flagstone. Beds of quartzite alternate, here and there, with fine masses of roofing-slate, which is obtained by a true transverse cleavage ; and on both banks of the Rhine, for about a mile above and below Caub, we found a slate-rock hardly to be distinguished from the lower slates of the Ardennes.
Below the fine slate zone of Caub, the rocks (though often with a true transverse slaty cleavage) are more arenaceous, pass here and there into masses of psammite, contain bands that are highly fossili- ferous (e.g. the rocks on both sides of the Rhine for a mile or two above St. Goar, Lurleu, &c.), and therefore, mineralogically as well as zoologically, agree more nearly with the upper slates of the Ardennes.
The two traverses, by the gorges of the Lieser and the Ees, which descend from the Eifel to Wittlich and Lutzerath, present a similar sequence.
(].) The fossiliferous marls, red slates, and psammites under the Eifel limestone.
(2.) Great masses of slaty flagstone, &c.
(3.) A great deposit of coarse arenaceous slate gradually passing, as we approach the banks of the Moselle, into the structure of a true slate formation. The upper part is most fossiliferous, and what is presumed (more on general analogy than on any evidence of sections) to be the lower part becomes less and less fossiliferous. Occasionally, however, the lower slates are intersected by certain bands, in which fossils are very numerous. Fine illustrations of the mineral structure of this third group, of its contortions, and its great development, are seen in the noble gorges of the Moselle, above and below Cochen; and in the fine transverse gorge of the Ees between Lutzerath and Alf.
On all these traverses, fossiliferous bands are found ; and the many forms of Orthis belong to the same general group as those from the banks of the Rhine, and from the upper slates of Belgium and the Ardennes. Hence all the rocks which are beneath the fossiliferous marls at the base of the Eifel limestone, and are expanded through the districts we have last noticed, may be considered as a vast development of the Silurian system, without any subordinate bands of limestone, or distinct subordinate formations, to enable us to compare them with the subdivisions of that system in England. Hence also (with the exception of the more perfect slate rocks near Caub and on some parts of the right bank of the Moselle below Treves, which may be provisionally assumed to represent the lower slates of the Ardennes (systeme ardoisier inferieur), we may regard the same series of rocks as representing, in their higher psammites, a portion of the lowest division of the systeme anthraxifere of Mons. D’Halloy and Professor Dumont; and in their lower arenaceous slates the systeme ardoisier superieur of the same authors.
It remains for us to notice the chain of the Hundsriick and the Taunus, which are one continuous formation, only split asunder by the gorge of the Rhine immediately below Bingen. It appeared to us, after repeated examinations, that, assuming the slate rocks near Caub to be the oldest members of the Rhenish series, we had a regular ascending section, through arenaceous and earthy slates and flagstones, to the quartz rock and fine chloritic schist of the Hundsriick and the Taunus. We made five or six traverses through different gorges of these chains, with a view of making out the facts of superposition ; and in every instance we arrived at the same conclusion. If we can trust the evidence of sections, these chains overlie the slaty rocks immediately skirting their north-western flanks.
The beautiful crystalline structure of these chains, their fine masses of white quartz rock, of chlorite slate, and micaceous slate, have led many authors to regard them as the oldest rocks of the Rhenish provinces ; and this first error has been confirmed by a second, in which slaty cleavage has been mistaken for stratification. 
Among the slate rocks of the Rhine the cleavage planes usually hang to the southeast, and keep their direction and inclination even among masses which are violently contorted. Hence any one assuming the cleavage planes for beds would not only form erroneous conclusions about the dip, but also most exaggerated notions of the thickness of the formations. Now in one or two places on the north flank of the Taunus, though the slate beds dip south-east, the inclination of the cleavage planes is reversed to the north-west: and hence, without very careful observation, we might be led to suppose that the quartzites of the chain rose from beneath the slates; which (if our views be correct) is a conclusion directly contrary to fact.
But it may be objected, that if the rocks of the Taunus and Hundsriick be members of an ascending section commencing from the old slates of Caub, we ought also to find corresponding rocks in the ascending sections on the other side of the old Rhenish slates; otherwise there must be a want of symmetry in the sections on the opposite sides of the central system. We admit the force of the objection; and we reply, that there are very fine quartzites in the ascending sections from the left bank of the Moselle towards the Eifel (for example in the Grunen-Wald north of Wittlich), and consequently that the ascending sections are not without mineralogical symmetry. Again, we found similar masses of crystalline quartzites associated with trappean rocks, on the right bank of the Rhine, and rising out at various points between Limburg and the Taunus#. If such masses have been produced by the action of igneous rocks on the more arenaceous slates, we have no right to look for their symmetrical arrangement on any corresponding sections. In short, we regard the structure of the Hundsriick and the Taunus as due to a long-continued action from below; which first lifting up their beds and twisting them, while in a softer state, into most violent contortions, gradually mineralized them and changed them into what they now are. Nor has the activity of these subterranean causes yet entirely ceased. The phaenomena we have described may be regarded as the effects of their early and intense activity ; while the hot springs of Wisbaden and the bubbling fountains of Schlangenbad, Langen-Schwalbach, and Nieder-Selters give indications of their feeble and expiring efforts in this mineralized region.
But our evidence does not end here; for we found Silurian fossils, from the quartzites of the Hundsriick, in the museum of Trbvesf. We afterwards crossed to the eastern side of the chain, near Berkenfeld ; and, through the kindness of M. Booking, were directed to some quarries (immediately above Abentheur and Ringenberg) among fine vertical masses of quartz rock containing many organic remains. In these rocks were one or two species of Orthis, two large species of Delthyris, and the singular coral Pleurodictyum prohlematicum; which fossils also abound in the formations under the Eifel limestone ; and are commonly found on the banks of the Ahr, the Rhine, and the Lahn, associated with the Homalonoti, and other characteristic Silurian types. Thus were our previous conclusions respecting the age of the mineral masses composing the Hundsriick and the Taunus, confirmed by the additional evidence of the fossils. It is indeed true that organic remains are very rare within the limits of these chains ; but our only surprise was that any traces of organic forms should have been left among rocks so greatly mineralized.
As general conclusions from this and the preceding part, we may state :—
That, considered on a broad scale, the successive natural groups of strata, and the successive natural groups of fossils are in approximate accordance.
That as the broad areas of the physical groups of strata are ill defined, so also are the boundaries of the fossil groups ill defined, and pass into one another.
That as there are no great mineralogical interruptions of the deposits, producing a discontinuity or want of conformity among the masses, so also there seems to be no want of continuity among the groups of the great Palaeozoic series of animal forms. If the extreme terms be compared together, every object is dissimilar : but when the proximate groups are put side by side, there are many points of resemblance, and many of specific agreement . These conclusions are not offered as an hypothesis, but appear to us as legitimate inferences from the facts we have had before us during the compilation of this paper.
Before we proceed to notice the formations of the chain of the Hartz, it seems expedient to give a brief sketch of its structure, which is, we believe, not well understood by the generality of British geologists. In English works, published not more than twenty years since, and professing to give some account of this region, the granite of the Brocken was placed in the geological centre ; and all the stratified formations were delineated as mantling round it, and dipping from it in most regular order, beginning with the oldest slates at a high angle of inclination, and ending with the newer Flotz rocks of the age of our green sand and chalk in a position almost horizontal.
These assumed facts were connected with the Wernerian theory, and offered in support of it. Hence they obtained a currency in this country which they very little deserved. In the year 1829, when we first crossed this chain, our surprise was indescribable when we found that the granite of the Brocken did not occupy any mineralogical centre—that it burst out at one side of the chain—that it very little affected the general strike of the adjacent beds—that the whole neighbouring series of secondary rocks was in a reversed position—and that all the “flotz” rocks on the N.E. side of the chain were highly inclined and often vertical. Errors like those above alluded to, have now been long exploded in the country which gave them birth.
As seen on a coloured physical map, the high lands of the Hartz put on the form of an irregular chain extending about N.W. and S.E. The greater part of these high lands are occupied by old slaty rocks ; pierced, however, by innumerable masses of trap, porphyry, &c., and by two great bosses of granite, both of which break out on the eastern side of the chain, and come down almost close to the secondary formations. It will also be seen by a glance of the eye at a geological map of Germany, that all these high lands are surrounded by secondary deposits (commencing with the red sandstone, zechstein, &c., and ending with the chalk), arranged with a near approach to symmetry. In one or two places on the north and south sides of the chain, and also near its western extremity, the old slate rocks (grauwacke) are immediately overlaid by a coal formation ; but it is so imperfectly developed, so nearly linked with the rotheliegendes, or so much concealed and overlaid by porphyry, as hardly to constitute any feature on the map.
In making a traverse through almost any part of the old slate rocks of the Hartz, we find that their strike differs not much from the strike of the grauwacke of the Rhenish provinces, being on the average about N.E. by E. and S.W. by W. Hence the general strike of the beds by no means coincides with the longer axis of the high land of the Hartz ; but, on the contrary, is more nearly at right angles to it. By this structure the subordinate features of the region are greatly modified : and from the top of the Brocken, or any of the other high elevations of the Hartz, one may trace a series of small subordinate ridges, defined nearly by the actual strike, and running transversely to the principal bearing of the chain.
On the contrary, the strike of the secondary system surrounding the Hartz (however modified here and there by local causes), is on the whole about N.W. and S.E. Hence it follows, that the direction of the chain of the Hartz, as laid down on a physical map, is not defined by the strike of the mineral masses composing it, but by the general direction of the unconformable secondary strata which surround it. We have no example of such a chain in England.
In mineral structure the slate rocks of the Hartz agree generally with those of the Rhenish provinces. They agree also in their modifications of structure, and in their modes of association with trappean rocks: and in the contortions of their beds, and in the total inversion of enormous masses of them, they present the same difficulties in determining the true order of superposition from the mere evidence of vertical sections. But it is not merely from vast contortions and inversions, and the frequent intrusion of trappean rocks (like those described in the former pages of this paper), that the order of the formations is obscured. The great bosses of granite also play a most important part, both in modifying the structure of all the neighbouring rocks, and in producing a distinct order of dislocations. By the combination of all these disturbing causes, the chain of the Hartz has literally been broken into fragments, in such a manner that it would be almost impossible to give them any symmetrical arrangement out of which we might eliminate their true relations to one another.
Lastly, in the Hartz the older strata are on every side cut off abruptly by the unconformable abutment of the secondary strata ; so that we look in vain for any frontier, like that of Westphalia ; where, after escaping from a sea of troubles, every formation rests in its proper order.
Before we go on to consider the evidence offered for the age of the formations of the Hartz, from analogies of structure and from fossils, we may briefly notice the principal igneous rocks which enter prominently into its structure.
They may be divided into four distinct classes.
Trappean rocks that rise irregularly among the beds, and strike nearly with them.—Some masses appear to have been protruded through the aqueous deposits : others are in more regularly stratified bands, passing sometimes into the state of schaalstein, and therefore apparently of a date contemporaneous with the slate rocks. From what we saw of these rocks, and still more from the specimens kindly exhibited to us by Professor Hausmann, they may be described in general terms by the name of greenstone, with many modifications. They are often ferruginous, and associated with deposits of iron ore near their junction with the regular strata; often very felspathic, containing here and there much Saussurite and small crystals of hypersthene, and rarely schiller-spar.
Granite of the Brocken, the lower part of the valley of the Bode, fyc.—That this granite is newer than the rocks of the preceding class, is proved by the fact, that it cuts them all off and shoots its veins into them, or into the series of the rocks, of which they seem to form an integral part. Neither can it admit of any doubt that it is a true eruptive rock : for in the upper part of the Ocker Thai, masses of grauwacke with organic remains are caught up in it; and in ascending the Brocken we found several blocks of granite with imbedded splinters of grauwacke. Again, the slates nearly in contact with it, are often converted into hornstone, and the arenaceous grauwacke into quartz rock ; and the junction specimens exhibit almost all those modifications of structure w'hich are so well known in Devonshire and Cornwall. The granite of the Hartz, like that of Devonshire, has lunvever produced but a very small effect on the general strike of the chain. Yet does it appear to have produced enormous derangements in the position of the subordinate masses: for all the older rocks, extending for many miles on the north side of the granite of the Brocken, are in a reversed position; and few of the masses near it show any conformity to its surface.
Inverted and fragmentary condition of the strata north of the Brocken, near Goslar.
Quartziferous porphyry ( Quarzfiihrender Porphyr).—It rises up in several bosses of considerable extent, in which respect it is unlike the elvans of Cornwall. Yet does it occasionally send out dykes into the neighbouring strata; and in mineral structure it has close analogies with the commonest varieties of Cornish elvan. The specimens of this rock, which we saw near Stolberg, contained a great deal of pinite. These trappean masses are considered, we believe correctly, as newer than the granite, in w'hich respect they present another analogy with the Cornish elvans.
Newer trappean rocks, overlying and alternating with coal shale, red sandstone (rothliegendes).— These are described in the German maps of the Hartz under the general name of Quarzfreier Porphyr. They are of very varied structure, passing through every shade, from red felspar rock to black augitic trap and basalt. The accompanying woodcut will explain their general relations, both to the newer and older stratified masses, as seen in some remarkable sections near Ilefeld, on the south side of the chain, where these porphyries are magnificently developed. Considered as a whole they are undoubtedly true eruptive rocks ; yet are they most intimately associated with the red sandstone and the thin carboniferous beds : and in one or two places which we examined, the beds of meagre shale and reddish grits, though containing coal plants and alternating with thin bands of coal, seemed in a great measure to be made up of recomposed trap.
This Quarzfreier Porphyr is therefore unquestionably of a newer date than most of the trappean masses above alluded to ; and it is regarded by Von Buch and some German geologists of high authority as a manifestation of those subterranean forces which produced the last great elevation of the Hartz, and gave the present strike and impress to the secondary system by which the chain is surrounded. We were disposed to regard the granite as the indication of the great moving power in elevating the chain; and we thought our views confirmed by the complete inversion, not merely of the older rocks, but of the whole secondary series (including red sandstone, muschelkalk, greensand and chalk), in the neighbourhood of Goslar. But the subject is one of the greatest complexity, and we do not venture to oppose our opinions to those of Von Buch, Hausmann, or any of the geologists who have described the igneous rocks of the north of Germany in such admirable detail. One thing at least is certain, that the formations of the Hartz must have undergone many movements; and the position of the surrounding strata seems to prove that the whole chain must have had a great movement en masse, since the period of the secondary deposits.
It is demonstrated, by the sections, that the strike and flexures of the grauwacke were effected before the existence of the overlying coal and rothliegendes. On the contrary, we have shown that in Belgium and Westphalia the strike and flexures of the grauwacke are propagated into the coal formation. Are we then to believe that the causes which produced the peculiar physical impress on the vast series of strata in the Rhenish provinces, belonged to a different period from that during which the strike and contortions of the Hartz were effected? We answer this question in the negative, believing that the older rocks of the Hartz and the Rhenish provinces compose but one system, made up of similar component parts, which have been similarly acted on and dislocated at the same periods of time : and we escape from this apparent contradiction by supposing that the coal measures of Westphalia and Belgium are an older part of the series than the coal measures of the Hartz. Indeed we regard the coal-beds on the flanks of the Hartz as the very highest part of the carboniferous series, just where it alternates with and passes into the bottom beds of the new red system ; and by no means as representing the whole carboniferous system. On this view there is no contradiction in our previous conclusions.
Age of the Sedimentary Deposits of the Hartz.
Having thus considered the general structure of the Hartz, we next come to consider the age of its sedimentary deposits. That in their structure, their strike, their accidents of position, and their fossils, they present the closest analogies to the rocks of the Rhenish provinces, is easily shown ; but in explaining the relations of the subordinate formations to one another, we are, for reasons already stated, involved in the greatest difficulties. There are, however, among the fragmentary masses of the Hartz a few sections which give a pretty clear indication of natural groups, especially when put in comparison with the still clearer sections of Westphalia. We will first shortly notice one or two sections on the north-western side of the Brocken.
Section from Osterode to Clausthal.
In ascending from Osterode to Claustlial we crossed one of the great spurs of the Hartz, composed of alternating beds of grit, psammite and shale, striking about N.E. and S.W., and dipping at a great angle, sometimes N.W. and sometimes S.E., the latter dip being most prevalent. The sandstones were generally in thin hard irregular beds, from one to four inches in thickness; more rarely in well-defined beds from six inches to two feet in thickness; their colours were grey, greenish-grey, mottled, purple and reddish ; and sometimes almost black, from the carbonaceous stains diffused through them. The alternating shales were generally thin-bedded, of bluish grey and purple colours, and had, here and there, much carbonaceous matter between their laminae. During the traverse we hardly saw a rock we might not match among the culm-measures of Devon ; and here also, as in Devon, we found an indefinite number of impressions of small reeds and grass-like plants. The rocks above described are broken through and interfered with by masses of greenstone, amygdaloid, &e., ranging nearly parallel to the prevailing strike; and the whole system is continued till it is lost under the alluvial covering near Clausthal.
Section from Clausthal to Griind.—(PI. XXIII. fig. 18.)
In making this traverse by the mine-works, we first crossed a series of beds dipping S.E. at a considerable angle, but not without the interruption of many great irregular flexures. They contained a few impressions of plants, and could not be mineralogically distinguished from many parts of the culm-measures of Devon. Near the Frankenhamer Hiitte are thick beds of sandstone with fine Calamites and other vegetable impressions. Some of the great masses of sandstone are separated into rhombohedral blocks by a double set of joints,—one set, (,strike-joints) ranging with the beds, though generally dipping to an opposite point of the compass ; the other set (dip-joints) ranging nearly N.W. and S.E.
The colours of these sandstones are various—yellowish grey, brown, greenish grey, smoke grey, with small quartz veins, &c. Small spots of kaolin are diffused through some of them; and among them, not unusually, are seen numberless bright granules of greasy quartz. Beds like these, alternate with slightly micaceous flagstones, and thick beds of dark carbonaceous shale.
Further down the valley (below the smelting-houses) are beds of a very coarse grit, with granules of greasy quartz as large as peas, like many varieties of millstone grit. These rocks rise into the hills towards Griind, in the direction of which we continued our traverse through a dense forest, which greatly obscured the section.
We then crossed some beds of dark, indurated, carbonaceous shale, from beneath which rises a very remarkable mass of limestone. Its dip is extremely obscure, some beds being greatly mineralized, broken, fissured, and penetrated by veins of sulphate of barytes; but as the principal mass ranges through the dense forest in a direction about N.N.E., we presume that it represents the true strike of the beds. This limestone is generally light-coloured and highly crystalline ; and the veins and hollows on its flanks are in some places much charged with iron ore. The whole mass of it, especially in the Hiibigenstein (which rises into bare pyramidal peaks in figure giving a minature resemblance of some cf the dolomites of the Alps), is much charged with corals, and in some of the earthy partings of the more crystalline beds or masses are numerous fossil shells. The corals, as a suite, are identical with those of the great limestone of Westphalia and the Eifel. 
On the west side of Griind the section is almost entirely concealed ; and the whole series of older rocks is soon afterwards cut off by the terrace of the overlying zechstein.
From the whole evidence, we have no doubt that the calcareous mass of Griind is a true Devonian limestone; and that the overlying beds are the equivalents of those parts of the Westphalian sections which extend from the great limestone to the base of the coal-measures.
We afterwards made a complete traverse from Clausthal by the line of the Innerste; and though we were unable to make any connected section to determine the order of the successive mineral masses, we saw nothing to invalidate our previous conclusion.
To the west of the river gorge is a mass of limestone like that of Griind (which, however, we did not examine) ; and in descending the gorge (below the point where we had left it in the previous traverse) we met,first with black carbonaceous shales and grey sandstones; then with grits, shales and psammites,in some places contorted and greatly mineralized. Afterwards, near Lautenthal, we passed singularly contorted masses of Kiesel Schiefer, resembling the rocks before described north of Meschede; and we afterwards saw specimens of Posidonia obtained from these localities, though we were not fortunate enough to meet with that fossil during our traverse. Still further down the river gorge we met with quarries of a slightly calcareous slate, which we supposed to represent the shales between the Devonian limestone and the kiesel schufer. The structure of the rock was very interesting. The component beds were greatly contorted, and intersected by a fine, highly inclined, transverse, slaty cleavage inclining to the S.E. A number of regular horizontal joints gave a false appearance of horizontal bedding, and these were intersected by another system of dip-joints, with seams of carbonate of lime. The lower part of the valley (where the river emerges into the plains of keuper, muschelkalk, &c.,) gave us no additional information.
Section (N.N.W. and S.S.E.) from the Hills a few miles north of Goslar, through
Rammelsberg to the Granite of Ocher Thai.
The woodcut, Fig. 14, given in p. 286 will be sufficient to convey a general notion of the actual position of the mineral masses in this section.
We have first a series of dark earthy slates and psammites much contorted.
Then a series of hard dark glossy roofing slates, interrupted by great alternating parallel ridges of trap (e.g. in Grana Thai, Nordberg, and Steinberg). These schists have a fine slaty cleavage, which hangs steadily to the S.E. at a great angle. Some of the slates, alternating with the thick bands of trap, are, however, highly contorted, and of very complicated mineral structure, as is shown in the accompanying woodcut.
The undulating lines of this figure indicate the bedding; the inclined lines the cleavage; and the horizontal lines the peculiar joints or floors.
The true beds of slate are marked by a contorted stripe. The sides near the trap are altered and indurated ; the slaty cleavage is very well defined, dipping at a high angle to the S.E.; and the whole mass is separated into well-marked tabular masses by horizontal joints.
The preceding series is overlaid by soft earthy slates (of the gorge above Goslar), which, in their turn, are overlaid by the series of the Rammelsberg. The beds here continue on the whole to hang to S.E., but not at a great angle; and there are several small undulations, by which the dips are changed and sometimes reversed. Many of the beds are, however, intersected by planes of cleavage, inclined at a great angle toward the south-east, which sometimes convey a false notion both of the bedding and dip. Near the top of the hill we have the following apparently ascending section :—
(1.) Hard grey well-bedded sandstone.
(2.) Hard flagstone, with bands of indurated slate.
(3.) Chert or quartz rock, broken into small irregular fragments by joints coated with ferruginous stains.
(4.) Ragged arenaceous slates.
(5.) Hard quartzose arenaceous beds rising to the top of the hill. The preceding beds contain a few fossils.
Following the line of section to the southern side of the mountain, we found the arenaceous system

(grits, psammites, grainvacke, grauwacke-slate, &c.) alternating with bands of rotten-stone, containing very numerous fossils, among which we collected Trilobites, Tentaculites, one or two species of Delthyris; in short, the same group of fossils which characterizes the Silurian grauwacke of the Rhine.
Similar masses may be followed along the same line over another series of ridges into the Ocker Thai,.where they sometimes appear to abut against,- and sometimes even to dip under, the granite, at the most northern prolongation of the Brocken. In that valley all the phaenomena are of the highest interest. The relations of the rocks are shown in the deep clefts through which the Ocker finds its way. The granite rises into noble pyramidal forms, and the slates are mineralized, veined, broken up, and thrown into vast disjointed masses; and had we no other evidence than the great bare sections of the Ocker Thai, we should conclude that the strata composing the mountains on its north side had been elevated through an angle of more than 90°, and thrown into a reversed position.
We believe, indeed, that all the beds of the preceding section are in a reversed position; that the beds extending from Rammelsberg to the granite are the oldest,, and that the slate masses north of Goslar are the newest, portions of the section (see the woodcut, p. 286). We adopt this supposition because it best explains the relations of the mineral masses, and the distribution of the fossils; and there is in it nothing improbable, considering the vast derangements in the neighbouring country.
For example, we may take a section from the low secondary country, a few miles north-east of the Ocker Thai, to the granite, and find the following series :—
(l.) Tertiary rocks and chalk, in their natural position, and dipping from the chain of the Hartz.
(2.) Greensand greatly contorted, and on one side dipping towards the chain of the Hartz. Beyond these disturbed beds all the formations dip towards the central mass of the Hartz, and therefore appear to form an ascending section.
(3.) Jura limestone.
(4.) Lias overlying the preceding.
(5.) Keuper overlying the lias.
(6.) Muschelkalk and bunter sandstein overlying the keuper.
(7.) Slaty rocks, having on the whole nearly the same dip with the preceding, and appearing to overlie them.
(8.) Granite, abutting against, and in some places appearing to overlie, the grauwacke.
Now it is absolutely certain that the greater part of this section (extending over many miles) is in a reversed position. There is, therefore, no violation of analogy in the supposition we adopted respecting the older rocks in our previous section.
Among the fossils of the Rammelsberg range are two species of Homalonotus, one not to be distinguished from a species found at Altenahr: also Tentaculites, large crinoidal rings, several species of Orthis, and two of Spirifer, all undistinguishable from species found in the Silurian grauwacke of the Rhenish provinces above described. On the contrary, the small Orthoceratites and flattened Goniatites in the black slates N.W. of Goslar appear to us to be Devonian. Moreover, this supposition agrees better with the distribution of the great mineral masses towards Lautenthal. And hence we conclude that the whole section (woodcut, p. 286) is in a reversed position.
In the previous details we have endeavoured to give some notion of the formations occupying a triangular area extending from the northern extremity of the chain to a line drawn from Osterode to the Ocker Thai. This we regard as one of the fragmentary masses of the Hartz ; and according to our interpretation of them, the formations are composed of Silurian and Devonian rocks, ascending (in the highest parts of the section) to the base of the carboniferous system.
Section from the Granite of the Brocken through the Limestone of Elbingerode to the Granite of the Rosstrappe on the Bode.
It forms no part of our object to describe the granite of the Brocken; neither can we dwell on the bristling peaks of granite that fringe the cleft, a thousand feet in depth, through which the Bode escapes from the mid region of the Hartz into the plains of Quedlinburg. Still less are we called upon to describe the secondary rocks which appear at the south-eastern extremity of our section. They are placed there only for the purpose of giving a general notion of the great movements to which these formations have been subjected. Their general position is nearly vertical; and had a similar section been made from the Brocken to the country north of Neustadt, the same secondary series would have been seen in a completely reversed order, and appearing, as we have before stated, to dip under the old rocks of the central Hartz.
The rocks nearly in contact with the granite at both ends of the section are indurated and greatly altered in structure, and partially penetrated by granitic veins. A remarkable saline spring nearly marks the junction of the slaty rocks and the granite on the south side of the Rosstrappe.
We mounted to the line of our section from Wernigerode, through beds of grauwacke interrupted by many points and ridges of trap. Near the top of the ascent (a little to the north of Elbingerode) we crossed some courses of dark-coloured limestone with white veins, and associated with projecting bosses of trap. To the N.W. of this point are bands of ferriferous limestone alternating with beds of porphyry, the whole mass dipping at a great angle towards the Brocken. At Biicker Berg the iron ore forms an enormous mass, resembling some of the deposits near Dillenburg; but it still preserves a rude conformity to the prevailing strike and dip of the beds.
Over the preceding series are dark slates and kiesel schiefer; and, if we are not misinformed, Posidonia schist has been discovered on the same line, though in our rapid examination we were not fortunate enough to find it. Close to the granite the beds are entirely mineralized ; and in most of the geological maps are represented by a distinct colour under the names of Trap, Diorite, Hornfels, Ccc. From under the preceding series rises the dark bluish grey coralline limestone of Elbingerode, which in its mineral character, as well as in its fossils, is the perfect counterpart of the great limestone of Westphalia. 
Taking then this limestone as a centre, we have an ascending section towards the Brocken, agreeing (not merely in its general relations but even in its mineral accidents) with many of the ascending sections, from the great limestone of Westphalia to the base of the carboniferous system.
We believe that the great limestone of Elbingerode forms a kind of irregular dome, throwing off nearly the same succession of beds to the N.W. and to the S.E. It undergoes many changes of colour and structure, especially in the vicinity of the igneous rocks by which it is pierced, when it sometimes becomes very hard and crystalline, and nearly loses all traces of regular stratification.
We, in the first instance, continued the section to the S.E. along the Bode, by Rubiland and Bohman’s Hohle, and thence down to Schiefer Thai; and the phaenomena were in the following order. A little below Elbingerode the limestone is cut through by a great band or dyke of porphyry; beyond which it becomes lighter coloured, obscurely stratified, and more jointed. Again, a large trappean mass interrupts the limestone; some of it passes into a nearly compact feldspathic rock, other parts are dark and almost basaltiform ; but its structure is very variable. This mass may be regarded as the centre of elevation ; for beyond it the dip of the limestone is reversed to the south-east. The same dip is continued in a greater succession of beds of subcrystalline limestone, through Rubiland and Bohman’s Hohle ; and a little below the latter place a mass of porphyritic trap has broken through the limestone and brought up some beds of the inferior grauwacke.
Beyond this spot are some beds of crystalline limestone quarried for marble, not far from which are masses of iron ore. This part of the series is followed by a great succession of stratified trappean rocks, some of which are extremely cellular (blatterstein); others pass into green and thinly laminated schaalstein; some resemble earthy regenerated beds, while others are more crystalline, and pass into a true porphyry with a compact base. These singular rocks are continued into a part of Schiefer Thai considerably below the village of Neuburg, and are then replaced by dark glossy slates containing a few calcareous veins.
Several of these bands of slate alternate with the schaalsteins and other stratified trappean rocks, the whole series preserving the same strike and south-easterly dip.
To the section just described many of the ascending sections of Westphalia and Nassau, which commence with the great limestone and rise to the base of the carboniferous series, present the closest analogies. Respecting the age of the contorted and altered slates which extend to the granite of the Rosstrappe, we possess no materials for offering any exact opinion; and it is possible that among them some beds may have been brought up, by the action of the granite, of an older date than any of those above described in the traverse from Elbingerode.
From the lower gorges of the Bode we returned to the south-eastern edge of the great calcareous dome near Hiittenrode. The ascending section is there more clear than on the banks of the Bode, being less modified and interrupted by the trappean slates. It is nearly as follows :—
(1.) Great limestone.
(2.) Four or five bands of limestone, alternating with masses of brown and some red iron ores.
(3.) Stratified slaty trappean rocks (schaalslein, &c.), alternating with some dark slates.
(4.) Dark-coloured slates, &c.
Beyond Hiittenrode the bands of ironstone recede towards the north, bending round with the dome of limestone ; and along the new chaussee, from Hiittenrode to Blankenburg, both black slate and kiesel schiefer are seen distinctly to overlie the limestone series. The analogy with the Westphalian sections {supra, p. 229 etseq.) is therefore still more complete than we had shown it to be in either of the two preceding traverses.
Lastly, we descended to Blankenburg among schists, psammites, and masses of eruptive trap, probably of an older date than any of the rocks in the above section.
Two lines drawn, in the strike of the beds, across the chain, one through the granite of the Brocken, the other through the granite of the Rosstrappe, will cut off a great central area. Within this area, are the rocks last described, and on the northeastern side of it we have shown that the Devonian system is widely expanded. The beds on the south-western side of the central area we did not examine; but, from general analogy, and from the information we obtained respecting them, we believe that none of them are older than the Silurian grauwacke of the Rhenish provinces.
South-eastern Extremity of the Hartz.
A line drawn along the strike of the beds a little north of Ballenstadt and Stoll- berg, cuts off the south-eastern extremity of the Hartz, which it remains for us very briefly to notice.
We made one excursion from Ballenstadt to Magdesprung, and thence down the whole gorge of the Selke. We found a dark limestone, with white veins, alternating with schists and psammites near the Furst-weg, about three miles from Ballenstadt; but we were not fortunate enough to find any fossils associated with it. After descending among bosses of trap to Magdesprung, we found beds of hard glossy clay slate, with a true transverse cleavage, crossing the Selke below the village, and dipping about S.E. Further down the banks of the river the slates became calcareous, and a dark-coloured limestone (with the same strike and dip) crossed the valley. We found a few encrinital stems in it, but no good characteristic fossils. Further in the descending traverse were many masses of hard grau- wacke of various colours, generally grey or greenish grey, and sometimes altered, extremely jointed, and interrupted by projecting masses of trap.
After several undulations near the mouth of the gorge the prevailing dip is reversed to the N.W.; and the older rocks are overlaid unconformably by red conglomerate, coal beds, red sandstone, &c., which dip, from the upturned edges of the slaty rocks, towards the low country. The coal has been worked extensively all the way from Meisdorf to Ballenstadt, and is undoubtedly subordinate to the red conglomerates and red sandstones associated with it. Its relations are very clear, not being obscured, as at Ilefeld (ante, p. 286), by masses of eruptive porphyry.
From the structure of the slate beds on the Selke, the rarity of organic remains, and the absence of carbonaceous stains and impressions of plants, we concluded that the system of rocks on this traverse belonged to the older or Silurian grau- wacke of the Hartz.
We afterwards made a complete traverse of the chain by Ballenstadt, Magde- sprung, Hartzgerode, and Stolberg, and were accompanied by Mons. Zincken to the Schnechenberg (near Hartzgerode), where a dome-shaped concretionary mass of limestone, fifty or sixty feet thick, appears among the slates. It is dark grey and bluish grey, with many curved contemporaneous veins. The bottom of it passes into the slates; and there are foliated slaty portions through its mass ; but some of the larger subordinate concretionary masses will take a polish, and are used for marble. We remarked in it some fragments of encrinital steins, and one or two obscure traces of small bivalves ; but the fossils are very rare.
It appears, therefore, that between Ballenstadt and Hartzgerode there are three or four independent concretionary masses of limestone, nearly on the same line of strike, but with relations far too obscure to offer any good base line for the sections in this district of the Hartz. We have the authority of Mons. Zincken for asserting, that to the S. and S.E. of this line no limestone has yet been discovered, and that the prevailing rocks have the same general characters, and probably belong to the same age with those we remarked in the gorge of the Selke.
Stratified Rocks extending from the Thuringerwald, through Upper Franconia, to the Fichtelgebirge.
It formed no part of our original plan to examine the formations between the Thuringerwald and the Fichtelgebirge. But having decided to visit the calcareous deposits on the north flank of the Fichtelgebirge, we thought it most instructive to approach them by a long traverse from the Thuringerwald through all the older rocks of Upper Franconia.
We entered the country from Weimar by the line of the Saal; and passing over the successive escarpments of the muschelkalk, bunter sandstein and zechstein (the last of which in several places rests unconformably on the grauwacke without the intervention of any conglomerate), we made our first traverse among the older rocks beyond Schwartzburg by the beautiful gorges of the river Schwartza. We found the slate rocks dipping N.W.; they alternate with quartzites, and are intersected by dip-joints and strike-joints—the latter generally inclining to a point opposite to the dip of the beds. The cleavage is irregular—sometimes striking with the beds, but at different angles of inclination—and sometimes transverse to the beds, and nearly parallel to the dip-joints. Farther up the gorge are some contortions ; after which the dip is reversed to the S.E. There are some good slate quarries where this dip prevails, though the planes of slaty cleavage incline at a great angle to the N.W. In nearly the whole gorge, up to the castle of Schwartzburg, the induration of the rocks, the well-defined slaty cleavages transverse to the true beds, the alternations of quartzites with the roofing slates, and the chloritic tinge of many of the larger masses, reminded us of the lower roofing slates of Westmorland and Cumberland (Cambrian).
About three or four miles up the valley, at Dachnitz, we found beds of half breccia- ted and half concretionary marble dipping S.E. These beds alternate with bands of slate, exhibiting a transverse cleavage, which does not affect the limestone ; and the whole system is underlaid by black pyritous shales, containing many ferruginous concretions.
From Dachnitz we made a traverse on foot through mountain forests to Saalfeld. In one of the gorges (near the last-named place), through which passes the great road to Coburg, we found a limestone similar to that of Dachnitz, and associated in like manner with highly pyritous black shales used in the manufactory of alum.
Again, about two miles above Saalfeld, we examined, a fine cliff on the right bank of the river, composed of a reddish flagstone, some parts of which were studded with minute calcareous concretions. The calcareous matter was not sufficiently abundant to form any beds of limestone; but the general mode of aggregation was analogous to that in the limestone quarries above mentioned. These calcareous flagstones are of great thickness, and their prevailing dip is N.W., though they exhibit two sets of great flexures ; and they are overlaid by fine tabular masses of zechstein without the intervention of any red conglomerate. Like all the other calcareous bands in this region, they are underlaid by black pyritous shales used in the manufactory of vitriol.
In the absence of organic remains, of which we did not find a trace (with the exception of one or two obscure indications of crinoidal stems), it is in vain for us to offer any definite opinion respecting the age of the series of rocks above described. When on the spot, we thought them, as a whole, older than the grau- wacke of the Hartz ; and we are now disposed to class them provisionally with the upper slates of the Ardennes (systeme ardoisier supe'rieur of Dumont). Respecting the overlying deposits, we may remark, that the cliffs of zechstein or magnesian limestone near Saalfeld are very striking, and that the formation there maintains the same great development as on the southern and south-eastern edges of the Hartz.
It would be useless for us to attempt to offer a detailed section of the beds observed in an oblique traverse, which we made by the great road from Saalfeld to Coburg; but the following memorandums may serve to convey some notion of the structure of this mountainous country.
(1.) At the first hill the dip was N. and N.N.E., with many irregular undulations.
(2.) At the second hill the dip was S.S.E. and S.S.W., and after various undulations the beds for some way were nearly horizontal. The prevailing rock is a hard close-grained grauwacke, passing into flagstone and slate, and sometimes into a hard quartzite. Many of the beds exhibited rude irregular concretions and ferruginous joints.
(3.) At Schmeidefeldt are deposits of iron ore in nearly vertical masses, striking N.E. by N., and S.W. by S. with the regular beds.
(4.) At Wallendorf are quartzose flagstones and red close-grained grits, like those of the Longmynd and some of the older British slates.
(5.) Beyond this place we found red arenaceous slates, and some hard greenish slates brought up in long undulations; but on the whole the dip to the S.E. or S.S.E. seems to prevail.
At Hersach the whole series is carried under some black aluminous and pyritous slates containing some subordinate masses of limestone. These limestones offer analogies with the limestones on the Saal; and contain a few crinoidal stems, but no other fossils that we could observe.
Beyond this place a change occurs in mineral structure—the hard greenish slates and bands of quartzite disappear ; the beds become more earthy and arenaceous, resembling many of the rocks of the Rhenish provinces described in the early part of this paper.
Finally, the old rocks descend into the low hills at Sonnenberg, where they pass under the terrace of the new red sandstone.
We saw no reason for placing these rocks in a class different from that of the rocks between the Schwartza and the Saal near Saalfeld. We are informed, that rocks, of nearly similar structure, range (with countless undulations and numerous interruptions from ridges of trap) many miles further towards the south; and that a few Silurian fossils and a few impressions of plants have been found in some of their subordinate beds; in which case they may be classed with the fossiliferous grauwacke of the Rhine. Without venturing an opinion on a point we were prevented from examining personally, we may remark that the whole series appears to be overlaid by the highly fossiliferous limestones and slates south of Hof in the Ober Frankenwald, which we next proceed to notice.
Having been furnished with instructions by Count Munster (whose unceasing labours and numerous works have thrown so much light on the palaeontology of his country), we went from Baireuth to Hof; and during one or two short excursions from the latter place, collected together the facts represented in the section.
On our way to Hof we crossed the escarpments of the muschelkalk and hunter sandstein, and then entered on a defile among the older rocks at Bernich, from which place we skirted the north flank of the Fichtelgebirge, among crystalline slates and other altered deposits associated with granite. In the early part of this traverse we found a boss of porphyry, throwing off a mass of crystalline marble on one side, and of a thin-bedded encrinite limestone, alternating with schaalstein, on the other. The same series of beds was overlaid, near Latziiruck, by schaalstein passing into slaty porphyry.
We have no materials for marking the age of this limestone; and we mention these facts only to show the near analogies of structure exhibited in this country and in certain parts of the Hartz and of Nassau. We believe, however, that these analogies are presented by rocks nearly of the same age : for, if we mistake not, some of the crystalline and calcareous masses on the north flank of the Fichtelgebirge are only metamorphic portions of a series of rocks we are about to describe in the accompanying section.
The highest calcareous bands of our section occur at Trogonau ; but they also break out at Reg- nitz, Irsau, and Wiirlitz. They are composed of dark blue, uneven beds of limestone, with white contemporaneous veins, dipping with some irregularity, but on the whole to the S.E. at an angle of 25° or 30°. They are overlaid by a dark shale, which is lost under the black shale and alluvium of the plains below. In structure this limestone cannot be distinguished from the most common form of mountain limestone: and it contains Actinocrinites, Rhodocrinites verus, Amplexus coralloides (Sow.), several very large Productae (one of which is spined), Euomphali, and several mountain limestone corals, &c. We therefore think its identification with the mountain limestone (as determined by Count Munster) quite unequivocal.
The limestone is underlaid by earthy, dark-coloured schist, very ill exposed, over which we made a traverse of one or two miles to Gattendor.
At Gattendorf rises a lower limestone composed of dark grey, and in some places of reddish grey beds, dipping irregularly, but on the whole about S.W. at an angle of 30°. Most of the beds are subcrystalline and much jointed ; but some of them pass into a more compact state, and are much quarried for ornamental marbles. They contain many specimens of Orthoceratites, among which are O. speciosus,
O.	regularis, O. maximus, together with Clymenia undulata, Clymenia lata, Goniatites undulosus, fyc.
These beds are underlaid by earthy schists without fossils ; and by great masses of trap which break out on the banks of the river on the side of Hof.
On the N.W. of Hof is a great mass of marble, partly of a concretionary structure, and partly brecciated, resembling the marbles of Plymouth and other places in South Devon, but without a trace of fossils.
In the hills further to the N.W. are beds of grauwacke, and of calcareous slate with courses of impure limestone, &c., associated with great masses of trap. These beds contain many fossils, especially corals, among which abounded the Favosites polymorpha, and other Devonian forms. From these facts we think it obviously follows that the beds of the greater part of this section (extending eight or nine miles in length, without taking into account its undefined southern extremity) are Devonian, and that, the whole series is overlaid by the mountain limestone.
In a subsequent traverse by Hof and Naila to Gerolsgriin we found black flinty slate, with carbonaceous laminae (kiesel schiefer); much splintery altered slate associated with trap; alum slate with iron stone (near Naila); grauwacke penetrated with quartz veins, associated with trap, and almost passing into a quartz rock; soft earthy slate with dark-coloured calcareous bands, &c. We mention these phsenomena in the order in which they occurred; but the dips were continually changing, and we found no fossils ; and out of such materials we do not pretend to put together any consistent section.
Near Gerolsgriin the beds are more free from the influence of trap ; and in some fine quarries of sandstone, flagstone, and grauwacke slate, we found fossil shells (Delthyris, &c.) and some impressions of small plants. At Langenau, not far from this place, is a bed of marble ; and a little to the north of it, is a bed of impure coal, which they have attempted to work. Of this we saw specimens : but we did not visit the spot, as the works were filled with water. As phsenomena like those just noticed occur in the Rhenish provinces both above and below the great Westphalian limestone, we do not pretend to determine the exact place of the series of beds in the neighbourhood of Gerolsgriin.
Gerolsgriin to Prusseck.
From Gerolsgriin we made our last traverse to the S.W. as far as Prusseck, visiting the celebrated quarries near Elbersreute by the way. The early part of this traverse was through forests and over rounded hills, that gave no good sections ; but we marked on the road side much kiesel schiefer, much arenaceous flagstone and red shale (like the “ red drab” of Pembroke and Devonshire), and one fine mass of black limestone. Respecting the age of this series of rocks we offer no opinion, as we found not one fossil among them ; simply remarking, by the way, that their mineral characters agree well with those of the Devonian system.
From Elbersreuth we made a short traverse to the N.W. and completed the following section.
Contorted masses of arenaceous flagstone and earthy schist, through which at one point bursts out an amygdaloidal greenstone.
Marble breccia, the structure probably produced by the vicinity of the eruptive trap, as is hypothetically represented in our section.
Beds of hard grey limestone with many Orthoceratites and large Encrinites, and we believe also with traces of Clymenia, &c. Dip. W.S.W.
A great precipitous gorge, beyond which the great Clymenia limestone rises at an angle of 40°, dipping about E.S.E. Its fossils are very abundant; and from this spot Count Munster has obtained his finest species of Clymenia.
Under the whole limestone series are earthy schists containing Cardiola.
In addition to the fossils peculiar to the beds above described, are several species in common with the limestones of Wetzlar, Oberscheld, and Dillenburg. In England the Cardiola is indeed an upper Silurian genus, but on the whole evidence we have little doubt that the calcareous rocks here described are Devonian, and nearly on the parallel of the calcareous series in the neighbourhood of Hof.
It would require much labour and many traverses to arrange systematically all the masses of limestone that appear between Hof and Prusseck, and the chain of the Fichtelgebirge. Count Munster has, we believe, determined three distinct bands of limestone containing Clymenia, but they are not geologically far asunder, and if our views be correct they all belong to one system.
We here terminate our remarks on the calcareous series north of the Fichtelgebirge ; acknowledging their imperfection, and especially lamenting our present inability of connecting these deposits with those which are expanded farther north on the banks of the Saal. At the same time we may remark, that our visit, however rapid, satisfied us on one important point (and it was the chief object of our visit to the Fichtelgebirge), viz. the age of the great calcareous masses we have just described. Before our examination they had been classed with the oldest Palseozoic rocks : but seeing that these masses are overlaid by true carboniferous limestone, and that they contain the intermediary types so often before alluded to, we "were convinced on the spot that they ought to be classed with our Devonian system.
We also believe that the rocks, which occupy the mountain tracts of Franconia immediately to the north of the calcareous masses above described, are the equivalents of the slaty grauwacke of the Rhine, and therefore on the parallel of the Silurian system. But we wish not to dwell on opinions which we are unable to confirm, either by the evidence of sections, or by lists of characteristic fossils.
Such is the result of our examination of the older rocks of Franconia. Our general conclusions respecting the succession in the Rhenish provinces in Belgium, and in the Hartz, which are based upon a much more extensive and accurate survey, have been offered in the previous parts of this memoir. Our opinions are now presented to the Society in the best form we are able to give them, as inductions from all the facts we have been able to bring together, supported by such natural analogies as bear upon the questions of classification. We may have been led into some mistakes by a false interpretation of the evidence (often of a kind very intricate and difficult to disentangle); but we deny that we have in any instance turned ourselves away from the evidence that was before us, and based our conclusions on a preconceived hypothesis. The general results appear, as far as they go, to confirm the justness of the methods by which the geologists of this country have toiled to mark out the succession of their formations ; and we think also the justness of the conclusions at which we had arrived in former papers, respecting the true sequence of the older formations of Great Britain.

