IN 1832 I laid before the Geological Society a few remarks on the strata in the neighbourhood of Lisbon ; but having since spent some time in that city, I have been able to extend my observations and to correct the errors into which I had before fallen. During the latter part of my stay, I had the advantage of becoming acquainted with the Baron d’Eschwege, the author of a paper upon part of the district, in the eleventh volume of the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, to whom I am indebted for much valuable information.
In the present paper my former remarks are repeated only as far as is necessary to render the rest intelligible. I shall first describe the aqueous formations, following the descending order, both in the general arrangement of the subject and in the tables of beds and description of sections ; and then the igneous rocks, with the disturbances which the sedimentary deposits have undergone. A few remarks on the great earthquake of 1755 are given as an appendix.
PART I.—AQUEOUS DEPOSITS.
TERTIARY FORMATIONS.
   The tertiary beds appear to be entirely of marine origin, and they may be divided into three formations :
1. Upper Tertiary Sand.
2. Almada Beds; consisting of calcareous sands, sandy limestones, marls and clays. They
may be best observed in the cliffs on the south bank of the Tagus, near the village of Almada.
3. Lower Tertiary Conglomerate.
   These deposits occupy a basin, of which only a part is included in the region described in this paper. Their greatest extent is from the mouth of the Tagus to Abrantes, a distance of about eighty English miles ; and from Lisbon to Alcacer do Sal, about fifty miles. The Tagus runs through this basin from Abrantes to the sea, keeping close to its northern boundary, so that a very small portion of it lies north of the river.
1. Upper Tertiary Sand. 
   This formation consists of about 100 feet of fine grey quartzose sand and 150 feet of coarse, quartzose, ferruginous sand and gravel.
   On the south of the Tagus it covers nearly the whole of the tertiary district. Its beds are quite horizontal, except where they rest upon the inclined strata of the Almada formation towards the edges of the basin, and even there, the dip never exceeds ten degrees : I did not notice a single instance of their having been dislocated.
   Baron d’Eschwege pointed out to me a very remarkable rock on the banks of the Sado, half a mile above St. Ubes, called the ‘ Pedra Furada ’ or perforated rock, which belongs to this formation, and consists of irregular, perpendicular tubes varying from half an inch to a foot in diameter, of a very ferruginous sandstone, united by horizontal layers of the same substance : the cement of the sandstone is phosphate of iron ; the centres of the tubes and the spaces between them are filled with ochreous sand, which passes into the usual sand of the neighbourhood. The rock is about twenty feet in height and width; its extent inwards from the river is concealed by the overlying sand.
   I did not explore the whole of the boundary of the upper tertiary sand, which includes considerably more than 1000 square miles. North of the Tagus it is found only in low lands skirting the river near Santarem and Cartaxo; but it covers as ranch of the country between the Tagus, the Sado, and the sea, as would be cutoff by a line drawn from Abrantes to Alcacer do Sal, with the exception of two ridges of hills of older formations, which will be best seen by reference to the annexed map. It usually rests upon the Almada Tbeds ; but between the lagoon of Albufeira and Cape Espichel it overlaps that formation, and rests upon the red sandstone. Its greatest elevation above the sea is about 150 feet.
  I observed no organic remains in this formation.
  The sands of the upper division present barren, dreary heaths, which hardly admit of any cultivation ; but the fir thrives in the ferruginous sands of the lower division, which are cultivated here and there, though to little advantage. The only interest attached to this most barren formation arises from its mineral contents, which are richer than might be expected from so modern a deposit.
   Mineral Contents.—A mine of quicksilver was discovered in the beginning of the last century at Coina, by Manoel da Cruz Santiago, an individual celebrated in the annals of Portuguese mining. He had observed that a spring of water in the centre of the village was strongly impregnated with mercury. No account of this mine has been published, and I could only learn that it was worked profitably at a very slight depth until 1801, when it was abandoned, all the quicksilver having been extracted, which their method of working enabled the miners to reach. From the position of the spot, I have no doubt that it was worked in the lower beds of this formation.
   From a very early period the sands of the Tagus have been stated to contain gold-dust. It appears to be disseminated in very small quantities through the whole of the lower division of this formation, as it has been found in several places where the heavier particles of the sands of that division are separated by the action of rain or of the streams of water. The only spots where workings for gold-dust have been carried on regularly to any extent, are on the coast near Adi^a, about ten miles south of the mouth of the Tagus. The beach lies upon a bed of blue marl belonging to the Almada formation, but the cliffs consist of the ferruginous sands. The numerous springs which flow through them wash down large quantities of sand, and the waves give them another washing upon the beach; the workmen dig up this sand and submit it to a further process of washing, and the residue is treated with mercury to separate the gold.
   Baron d’Eschwege, who superintended these works for some years, has given an account of them in the eleventh volume of the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, and he has appended to it a statement of the result of the operations. He mentions that works were carried on at Adi^a in the fifteenth century as long as they were profitable, and that they were recommenced in 1814- and continued till 1826, when they were again found a losing concern. During these thirteen years 373 marks of gold were collected, varying in fineness from twenty-two to twenty-three carats. It appears that a remunerating quantity of gold is collected only after the natural washings by the springs and the sea have gone on for a considerable number of years; and therefore, another long interval must elapse before the washings can be again profitable.
2. Almada Beds. 
  This is the most interesting formation of the tertiary series, in consequence ot the variety of its rocks and the abundance of its organic remains. It may be studied very conveniently in the cliffs opposite to Lisbon, where the following observations were principally made. Unfortunately, the lowest beds are not there exposed, and they vary so much in thickness and appearance, within very short distances, that a stratigraphical table of the formation cannot be completed from observations made elsewhere.
The following is a tolerably correct list of the beds in the cliff, near Almada :
At Adica the uppermost beds consist of
Yellow calcareous sand	 10 feet.
Blue sandy marl, with many shells	 20	
the latter resting upon a calcareous bed. If these strata were placed at the top of the preceding list, the upper part of the formation would probably be completed ; the blue marl of Adi^a would then correspond with that of the valley of Piedade to the S.E. of Casilhas, where the uppermost beds cannot be distinctly seen.
   The most marked stratum of the series, is the blue clay (6) mentioned near the middle of the table; but this bed is in some places so thin as not to be easily recognized. Were it thought convenient to separate the formation into parts, the most natural arrangement would be Upper Limestones and Sands, Blue and brown Clay, Lower Limestones and Sands ;
but as some species of shells occur both above and below the clay, the subdivision would not be of much value.

   Quicksilver has been found in several places in the sand immediately above the blue clay, but in very insignificant quantities.
   Not having examined this formation in equal detail elsewhere, I can give but a general sketch of its position. On the southern side of the Tagus, it forms the cliffs from Trafaria to Casilhas, the dip of the strata being from 10° to 15° S.E. There are three considerable faults in these cliffs. At Casilhas the beds to the west of the village are raised about 100 feet above their prolongation on the other side of the street; at Fonte de Pipa, on the contrary, those on the west of the fault are about 130 feet below the same beds to the eastward ; and at San Lourenco a similar dislocation has taken place to the extent of about eighty feet. Owing to these faults, a more extensive section of the formation is obtained than the cliffs, which are only 280 feet high, would otherwise afford.
   North of the Tagus the Almada beds begin on the coast, a little to the west of Fort St. Julian, resting on the secondary limestone, and they reach as far as the Oeiras River, where they are cut off by a fault,—one bank of the river consisting of these beds, and the other of the secondary limestone; both rocks being also horizontal and at the same level.
   For about ten miles to the eastward, the upper beds appear to have been denuded ; and the tertiary strata are seen only at the tops of some hills about Santa Catarina and San Joze de Riba-mar. These outliers consist of the lower tertiary conglomerate, occasionally covered by small patches of the Almada beds.
   The Almada beds reappear in the middle of Lisbon, and continue along the north bank of the Tagus to the little village of Verdelha. At their western edge, under Lisbon, the upper beds rest unconformably upon the secondary limestone (Plate XV. Section 3), the Rua de San Bento marking very nearly the line of union of the two formations. To the north-west, the Almada series is bounded by the valleys of Odivellas and Vialonga, and rests conformably upon the lower tertiary conglomerate. Throughout this district, the dip of the Almada beds is from 5° to 10° S.E. The lower streets of Lisbon stand upon the blue clay, which may be traced for some miles up the Tagus between high- and low-water levels, all the cliffs toward the river consisting of the deposits above that stratum. The lower beds may be seen cropping out on the land-side of the deposit, but there is no good section of them there.
   The Almada beds in this part agree so nearly in dip and strike with those on the south bank of the Tagus, and with the detached outliers between Lisbon and the sea, as to prove that they were once continuous, and have been separated by denudation.
   Beyond Verdelha the formation is not visible within the district described in this memoir, the north bank of the Tagus being formed of older rocks; but it occurs again near Cartaxo, Santarem, Thomar and Abrantes, the last town being its extreme limit to the eastward. I do not know if it exists along the eastern edge of the basin, but to the south it forms the hill of Alcacer do Sal, where it rests upon slate-clay, the intermediate secondary formations being absent.
   In the centre of this tertiary district, a ridge of older rocks extends from Pal- mella to Cape Espichel, skirted by a zone of the Almada beds from St. Ubes to Palmella (Sect. 9, 11 and 13), and thence westward through Azeitao nearly to the coast, where they are concealed by the upper tertiary sand, overlying both these and the older rocks. Throughout this circuit the Almada beds rest upon red sandstone, and are more elevated than in the localities before described, the dip being usually from the subjacent formation: thus between St. Ubes and Palmella their inclination is about 30° S.E., and from Palmella to Azeitao between 25° and 30° N.E., being rather greater in the lower than in the upper beds ; but at Palmella, where the two lines of elevation meet, the disturbance has been more considerable, and the dip at the Castle-hill varies from 15° to 50° N. It is probably from the same cause that the formation attains its greatest height at this point, the castle being 930 feet above the sea (PI. XV. Section 9).
   A detached mass of the formation also occurs at the western end of the Serra de San Luiz, between St. Ubes and Azeitao, abutting unconformably against the edges of the elevated beds of red sandstone, which form that steep hill ; its dip, about 30° N., agrees with that of the same beds in the neighbouring Serra de Azeitao (Plate XV. Section 1), so that the valley between must have been occupied originally by the tertiary beds.
   The most violent dislocation of this formation is on the bank of the Sado, at the foot of the Serra de Vizo (Plate XV. Section 13), where an outlying mass of the limestone dips at 80° toward the older red conglomerate, having been elevated beyond the perpendicular.
   I did not observe the blue clay in this neighbourhood, nor could I examine the beds enough to ascertain to which part of the formation they belong ; they are mostly coarse, rotten, sandy limestones, containing many casts of shells, and probably belong to the lower division of the formation.
   This deposit affords the best land in the neighbourhood, both for corn and vines; and it is peculiarly suited to the growth of the olive, which thrives to greatest advantage in a light and semi-calcareous soil.
   Mr. George Sowerby has examined my fossils, and also an excellent collection made near Lisbon by James Smith, Esq., of Jordan Hill, who has very kindly allowed me the fullest use of the information derived from it; among them Mr. Sowerby has found the following shells, besides about twenty undescribed species.
Other localities where they have been found are marked against them. It will be observed that there are more of the shells of Bordeaux than of any other locality, hut not sufficient to identify the two deposits.
   Some papers laid before the Society by Colonel Silvertop (Proceedings, vol. i. pp. 216, 234 and 485, and vol. ii. p. 80), afford the means of comparing the tertiary basin of the Tagus with those of the South of Spain. The marine deposits of Alhama, Lorca, Baza, etc., coincide with the Almada beds; as they contain in great abundance the Ostrcea longirostris, which is one of the commonest shells at Almada, and a Pecten resembling the P. pleuronectes, but which Mr. George Sowerby considers a distinct species, and which is not uncommon in the cliffs at Almada. From some observations I made in crossing those parts of Murcia, I had considered the deposits of Alhama, etc., equivalent to the Almada beds, and Col. Silvertop’s memoirs confirm that opinion.	
   3. Lower Tertiary Conglomerate. 
   The oldest tertiary beds near Lisbon consist of a variety of distinctly stratified conglomerates, underlying the calcareous beds of the Almada formation. They are of limited extent, but vary very much in character; yet as they attain a considerable thickness, and agree in having all been formed during a period when a violent and extensive denudation of the older rocks was going on, they seem to deserve to be considered as a distinct formation.
   The principal deposit of these rocks may be traced bounding the Almada beds from Alverca and Verdelha through Vialonga and Tojal to Loures, where it expands to a breadth of four miles ; and thence it may he followed along the narrow valley which passes between Odivellas and Lumiar to Bemfica, where, turning towards Lisbon, it thins out and gradually disappears near the gate of San Sebastiao de Pedreira.
  At its northern extremity this deposit rests upon the red sandstone, but throughout the remainder of its course upon basalt: the beds dip conformably under the Almada formation at angles of 10° or 15° S.E., but the inclination increases in the lowest beds to 30°.
  This formation is well displayed where it is crossed by the road to Canessas, the beds there exposed, in a descending order, being as follows:—
The thickness of the formation is here about 200 feet.
  Near Loures and Tojal there is less of the harder conglomerates, and a greater proportion of marl, gravel, and the soft calcareous conglomerates.
  Many of the basaltic hills along the bank of the Tagus below Lisbon, are capped with a bed of clay containing basalt in different states of decomposition, upon which the Almada beds rest near Santa Catarina and San Joze de Riba-mar. This clay and decomposed basalt are sometimes fifty feet thick, and are without doubt of the same age as the similar beds near Loures and Odivellas, and must be referred to this formation. 
  I did not meet with the conglomerate south of the Tagus. I did not find any organic remains imbedded in it.
  The separation between the tertiary and the secondary series can nowhere be more distinctly marked than in the neighbourhood of Lisbon. The secondary rocks -were both disturbed and denuded previously to the deposition of the tertiary, which lie not only upon the newest secondary formation, but also upon rocks of very different ages. The separation between them is still further marked by an immense mass of basalt which overflowed the secondary formations before the deposition of any of the tertiary strata, and contributed by its degradation to form the earlier tertiary deposit.
  The description of the basalt will be given in that part of the paper which relates to the igneous rocks.
SECONDARY FORMATIONS.	
  This class of deposits consists of, 1. Hippurite limestone. 2. Red sandstone. 3. Espichel limestone. 4. Slate-clay and shale. 5. San Pedro limestone ; and
6. Older Red conglomerate.
1. Hippurite Limestone. 
  The uppermost secondary formation consists of calcareous beds varying from soft and argillaceous limestone to beautiful hard marble. I have called it the Hippurite limestone, as some of the beds abound with fossils belonging to the family of Rudistes, and nearly related to the genus Hippurites. It usually rests conformably upon the red sandstone.
Hills composed of this limestone form a very important feature in the country north and west of Lisbon, but I did not observe the formation south of the Tagus. A very good section is exposed on both sides of the narrow valley of Alcantara,
close to Lisbon, where the following beds occur:—

  This list does not include the whole thickness of the formation. The cliffs between Fort St. Julian and Cascaes consist of alternations of marl and grey limestone, the marl predominating in the upper, and the limestone in the lower part; and they are probably the highest beds of the formation. A good section of the lowest beds is in a ravine through which the road from Tojal to Bucellas passes. The limestone is there of a coarse texture and dark grey colour, with rather a slaty fracture, and forms beds three or four feet thick, with thin partings of marl. Putting these sections together, the formation will be found to exceed 500 feet.
  This limestone composes several distinct tracts ; the most northerly being a line of bold hills extending from Cereal to Villa Franca, rather beyond the district which I examined. Another narrow zone of Hippurite limestone ranges from Bucellas westward to Pero Pinheiro ; resting to the north upon red sandstone, and having its southern edge concealed by basalt. Only the lower beds are visible at Bucellas and Montacliique ; and these thin out gradually to the westward, being replaced by the
upper beds at Pero Pinheiro, where the formation is of inconsiderable thickness, and consists only of the latter. The large quarries at that village, which furnish pretty, light-coloured marbles, are worked principally in the beds which contain
the Sphoerulites. Along this line there is a slight dip to the S.E. Another distinct range of Hippurite limestone begins on the south of Loures, and reaches to the Bay of Cascaes. On the northern side it rests upon the red sandstone, and upon the south and east is overlaid by basalt. From Loures to the west of Bellas the beds dip S.E. at an angle varying from 30° to 50°, but
between Cacem and the coast, the inclination is usually less considerable, and in the sea-cliffs the beds are nearly horizontal. Between Loures and Bellas, the middle and lower parts of the formation are exposed; about Cacem the middle, and
near the coast the upper beds. The usual conformity between the Hippurite limestone and the red sandstone does not hold good throughout this range, for, towards Cascaes, nearly horizontal beds of the limestone rest upon inclined strata
of the sandstone ; still the direction of the dip of the two formations is the same. The limestone range widens out very much at its southern extremity ; the basalt capping its higher hills.
  The narrow valley of Alcantara, on the wrest side of Lisbon, is the line of a considerable fault which has raised to view the Hippurite limestone : the beds on the twTo sides of the valley correspond in altitude, but dip from' the valley in op-
posite directions, on the west side at 15°, on the east at 10°. An anticlinal line of more violent disturbance crosses the former from Campolide to Mon Santo, and it is to this cause that Mon Santo owes its elevation. Where the two faults cross, the
rocks are very much fissured and disturbed, and great landslips have taken place.
In one quarry I noticed six or eight faults, where the sides of the fissures had been rubbed to a beautiful polish. This spot is called Terremotos, and the disturbance of the rocks is frequently attributed to the great earthquake, but all the contem-
porary accounts of that catastrophe state, that this neighbourhood suffered very slightly.
  Organic Remains.—Among the fossils of this formation are the following:—
  The last three species are found in the chalk in the South of France.
   Also a very remarkable shell belonging to the family of Rudistes, which is, I believe, undescribed ; agreeing in form with Diceras, having one valve spiral and the other curved; but perforated longitudinally by parallel pores, reaching the whole length of the shell, and open towards the junction of the valves.
  2. Red Sandstone Formation. 
   Below the Hippurite limestone is a very extensive series of deposits consisting principally of ferruginous sandstone, but containing also beds of sand, marl, and limestone. The following is the usual order of the strata :
   Sandstones, alternating with sand, the whole very ferruginous.
   Marls of various colours, alternating with sand.
   Sandstones, alternating with sand.
   Calcareous sandstones and coarse limestones, alternating with sand and sandstones, and occasionally with marl.
   Coarse sands, sandstones, and coarse gritstones.
   The whole series divides naturally into three parts :
1. Ferruginous sandstones and coloured marls.
2. The calcareous division.
3. Gritstones, &c.
   The different divisions pass so gradually into one another, that I have not attempted to separate them into formations.
   The extent of country occupied by this series of strata is very considerable, but it would be tedious to describe its boundaries in detail, and they may be better seen on the map. The principal deposit reaches from Alhandra, on the Tagus, to the coast north of Colares, and occupies nearly the whole country northward of that line to Leiria, far beyond the range of country described in this paper; but in that district, it is partly concealed by the overlying Hippurite limestone, forming the hills which range north-west from Villa Franca. In the portion more immediately under consideration, the sandstones of the upper division occur along the southern edge of the deposit from Bucellas to the Atlantic; the central calcareous beds may be traced from Alhandra to Ericeira, passing the two villages of Enxarra and Mafra ; and the grits and coarse sandstones of the lower division lie further north, about Sobral, San Sebastian, and Torres Vedras. The usual strike of the beds is from
N.E. to W.S.W., and the prevailing dip is to the S.E.; but the whole country is so cut up by innumerable faults, that beds may be found dipping in every direction and at every angle : this is particularly the case about Mafra.
   A very considerable fault, extending westward from Alhandra, has modified the surface of that part of the country. On the south side of the fault, the calcareous beds of the middle division rise into the bold abrupt hills which form the eastern end of the lines of Torres Vedras, while on the north side the uppermost sandstones occur, overlaid by the Hippurite limestone; and they form the surfaces of the country to the northward. Judging from appearances, this fault extends a long way into the interior ; but I followed it only four miles, from Alhandra to Trancozo.
   One of the upper beds of the calcareous division resembles so closely the usual character of the Hippurite limestone, that I could not determine whether the limestone hill at Alhandra belongs to this formation, or is an outlying mass of that limestone.
   The tract of red sandstone, next in importance, forms a narrow band, reaching from the neighbourhood of Loures to Cape Sinchette. From its northern extremity to the Cascaes river the beds dip to the S.E., at angles varying from 20° to 60°, and at Sabugo they are perpendicular. They consist principally of the sandstones of the upper division, but the coloured marls are seen near Cacem, on the Cintra road, and the calcareous beds occur where the deposit widens out towards Sabugo ; the Mafra road crosses them in that neighbourhood for about three miles ; they occur also between Manique and Cascaes.
   The Cascaes river follows the line of a considerable fault, and on its western side the calcareous beds are exposed with a prevailing dip of 5° or 10° to the south : in this neighbourhood also the strata are disturbed by many small faults.
   The red sandstone ranges, on the south of the Tagus, from near Palmella and St. Ubes to the coast north- of Cape Espichel. The strike of the beds is nearly from E.N.E. to W.S.W., and their usual dip N. or N.W., at a high angle: this part of the formation has been dislocated by many considerable faults, but as they affect also several of the older rocks, all the disturbances of this neighbourhood are described together. 
   The upper division of the formation is better exposed near Palmella and St. Ubes than in any other part which I examined, except the hills behind Bellas north-west of Lisbon ; it consists here of 
1. Very ferruginous loose sand and gravel.
2. Fine sandstone, sands and marls of various colours.
3. Ferruginous sandstones.
1 The gravel is more abundant than usual, occupying some picturesque valleys between Azeitao and St. Ubes ; while the adjacent barren Serra de San Luiz, consisting of the succeeding beds of the same formation, rises abruptly to more than 1200 feet above the sea.
   The calcareous beds may be traced from the coast on the north side of Cape Espichel to Cezimbra, and again in the cliffs of the Serra de Risco; the lower sandstone division is visible only on the cliff, near the Chapel, at Cape Espichel : with these exceptions, this district consists entirely of the beds of the upper division.
  The country occupied by the upper strata of this formation is generally intersected by irregular valleys and ravines. The lower lands are fertile and wooded, but the liills are open and covered with heath : the calcareous rocks of the middle division form wild dreary hills, hardly capable of cultivation: and the lower sandstone division varies much, affording barren hilly districts and others of greater fertility. All the sandstones occasionally form extensive plains covered with pine-woods.
  The connexion of the red sandstone with the older rocks is exposed in few places near Lisbon. On the north of Cintra the sandstone overlies all the older formations, resting almost horizontally upon the inclined strata of Espichel limestone (Sect. 2 and 4), slate-clay, and San Pedro limestone, and upon the granite; and on the south of the Cintra hills, upon the Espichel limestone (Sect. 1 and 7). South of the Tagus it lies, with every degree of want of conformity, upon the limestone of the Serra de Arrabida, and upon the elevated peaks of the older red conglomerate of the Covoens and the Serra de San Luiz (Sect. 11 to 13).
Mineral Contents.
   Lignite has been found in this formation in many places, occasionally in sufficient quantity to lead to unsuccessful search for coal: the principal localities are Ericeira, and the neighbourhoods of Torres Vedras, Cascaes and Cape Espichel. I examined only the two last.
   The cliff, a little to the east of Cascaes, gives the following very good section of the lower beds of the upper sandstone division :—
     The lignite varies from a quarter of an inch to eight inches in thickness. The sulphur effloresces from some of the beds in great quantities. The vegetable impressions are fragments of leaves and stalks too imperfect for determination; the only interesting specimens met with being small seed-vessels. The beds have been thrown into great confusion at this spot by a basaltic dyke (PI. XV. Sect. 3 and 10).
   The lignite beds, near Cape Espjchel, occur in the calcareous division of the formation; and the following section may be seen in the cliff, about a mile to the north of the Chapel:—
Limestone, alternating with sandstone.
The coarse sandstones of the lower division of the formation.
   We were told that the lignite may be traced along the cliff northward for several miles to Aganheira, and that there it is thicker and of better quality.
   To the eastward of Cezimbra a similar section of sulphureous marls, accompanied by lignite, sand, sandstones and limestones, is exposed on the beach: the beds of lignite are not more than half an inch in thickness, and were it not for the abundance of sulphur, might easily be overlooked.
   The resemblance of the sulphureous deposits at Cascaes and Cape Espichel is so great, that they must be considered as identical, although at Cascaes they occur above the calcareous beds, and at Cape Espichel among them : this lessens the importance of the divisions of the formation.
   The tepid springs of Estoril, near Cascaes, rise so close to the sulphureous beds, that the water probably derives its virtues from them : the celebrated hot springs of Caldas da Rainha in Estremadura rise through the upper division of this formation, and may possibly owe their sulphureous qualities to similar beds.
   Gypsum has been worked in some quantity near the village of Sta Anna, three miles from Cezimbra. I did not examine the spot, but have reason to believe that it is in immediate connexion with the sulphureous marls.
   Organicl remains.—The following fossils have been found in the calcareous division of the formation :
     Near the Cintra hills the 'red sandstone rests upon a calcareous formation of very considerable thickness, to which, from its also forming the point of Cape Espichel, I give the name of Espichel limestone. Its principal deposit is a flat barren tract, which encircles the whole range of the Cintra hills, and attains its greatest breadth where the road from Lisbon to Cintra crosses the Charneca, but in other parts it is of little extent. It rests throughout conformably upon the slate-clay, dipping from the Cintra hills as from a centre at angles varying from 20° to 75°. There is an exception to this dip on the north of Cintra, where a line of disturbance, ranging east and west from Algerao to the coast, has raised some of the beds into a saddle, and formed two parallel faults. This dislocation may be seen to the north and northeast of the town of Cintra, and in the cliffs near the Praia de Macaas (Sect. 2, 4 and 5), but it is concealed near Colares by the red sandstone which overlies part of the formation. 
  In the whole of the district round Cintra, the formation consists of thick beds of coarse grey limestone, alternating with thinner beds of shale or marl: at the bottom of the formation the limestone beds are thinner, of a darker colour, a more earthy structure, and a slaty fracture.
  The hills along the coast, from Cezimbra to Cape Espichel, consist of the same formation. Beds of coarse grey limestone alternate with layers of shale, marl, and sandy clay, but the argillaceous beds are less important there than near Cintra. The dip of the strata is nearly north, varying from 45° to 70°; but at Cezimbra Castle, an igneous rock has caused great disturbance in them. The lowest beds are not exposed in this district, nor is the formation upon which they rest.
  The lofty ridge of the Serra de Arrabida may possibly belong to the same formation, but I have no conclusive evidence upon that point. It consists of a compact, light grey limestone, with partings of marl only between its lower beds, which have a similar earthy character and slaty fracture with those near Cintra. It agrees very nearly in strike and dip with the limestone ridge of Cape Espichel, from which it is separated by a fault at Cezimbra; but the absence of the alternating shales and marls, so marked near Cintra and Cape Espichel, renders the identity of the two deposits doubtful, and, unfortunately, I met with no fossils in the limestone of the Serra de Arrabida.
  The strike of the beds in the Serra de Arrabida is nearly east and west, and their prevailing dip is north at a high angle; but at the western end of the Serra the dip varies to N.W. and N.E., and on the northern side of the Serra de Vizo, it is 45°
S.	At these last-mentioned spots, the limestone rests unconformably upon the older red conglomerate.
  Near St. Ubes are two detached points of limestone which appear to belong to the rock of the Serra de Arrabida : the one forms a conical peak on the east side of the road from Palmella to St. Ubes, its beds dip S.E. about 80° (Sect. 9.) ; the other rests upon the older red conglomerate at the southern side of the Serra de San Luiz, and dips 45° S. (Sect. 13.); both these masses approach to conformity with the limestone of the north side of the Serra de Vizo.
  Organic Remains.—The following shells were found in this formation :—
    In the neighbourhood of Cintra, the Espichel limestone rests conformably upon an argillaceous formation, which constitutes a low rounded ridge, encircling the Cintra hills, which may be most advantageously examined at Ramalhao and Linho.
   The upper beds consist of shale and schist varying much in character; below them are numerous beds of slate-clay alternating with a variety of igneous rocks, and the lowest part is a thick deposit of dark shale. In no portion did I find any organic remains.
   The beds of igneous rocks vary from five to twenty feet in thickness, and the shale-beds are still thicker. The whole are regularly interstratified without any signs of disturbance. The shale rests with perfect conformity upon the San Pedro limestone, and dips on all sides from the axis of the Cintra chain at angles varying from 30° to 60°.
   Near Ramalhao, where the series is most developed, there are twenty or thirty distinct alternations of igneous rocks. On the north side of Cintra the formation is less important, and becomes gradually thinner; and in the cliffs at the Praia de Adraga it does not exceed 200 feet in thickness, and contains only one igneous bed, about twenty feet thick. I did not follow the formation quite round the south of Cape Rock, and do not therefore know its exact importance at that point.
   It is difficult to account for these alternations of igneous and aqueous beds, except by supposing that the igneous matter was poured out at intervals during the accumulation of the shale. There is no evidence to prove, whether these eruptions took place from the spot, where the granite hills of Cintra were afterwards elevated. The original formation was probably shale, which was altered into slate-clay by the heat of the igneous matter.
   The trappean rocks vary much in character within a few yards in the same beds; some portions being basaltic, others sienitic.
5. San Pedro Limestone. 
   Below the last formation occurs a considerable deposit of limestone, which rests upon the granite, and forms an inner zone around the Cintra hills.
   The limestone in the upper beds is dark grey or black, and of an earthy structure, and in some places it is very bituminous, and passes into swinestone ; but as it approaches the granite, it gradually changes into a crystalline marble, and from that into calcareous spar. The formation is well exposed on the road-side, and in some large quarries at the village of San Pedro, from which I have taken its name. At this spot the beds succeed each other in the following order:—
   The same gradual change may be traced around the Cintra hills, wherever the limestone can be seen resting upon or approaching the granite. In some spots the crystalline marble is quite equal in colour to the Carrara, but it is too soft for use.
   The stratification of the limestone is hardly altered by the change of structure, but the crystalline beds are thicker than the others. The alteration is very gradual, the characters of each bed being uniform, and a slight change taking place between it and the one next below.
   The strata dip from the granite at angles varying from 40° to 70°; near San Pedro they are considerably dislocated.
   Organic Remains.—I found in the limestone the casts of one univalve and one bivalve, but too much crushed to admit of determination.
6. Older Red Conglomerate. 
   On the west of St. Ubes a coarse conglomerate rises into hills of considerable height, in a position entirely unconformable to the neighbouring formations. There is no clue to its place in the series, except that it is more ancient than all the surrounding strata; but as it does not occur near Cintra, there is no evidence of its being older than all the formations just described in that district, for the altered characters of the two lowest of those deposits make it impossible to compare them safely with rocks elsewhere. In this uncertainty, I have left the account of the formation to the end of the aqueous deposits ; expecting that it will hereafter be found to be older than any of the strata yet noticed.
   The conglomerate usually consists of rounded pebbles from half an inch to more than a foot in diameter, firmly cemented in coarse ferruginous sandstone, and composed mostly of white or ferruginous quartz ; but pebbles of jasper and mica- slate, and a few of limestone also occur. The harder beds have been used for ornamental work in most of the old churches about St. Ubes ; but the stone will not take a good polish, owing to its unequal composition.	
   The conglomerate forms the highest ridge of the Serra de Covoens, at the eastern extremity of which it is laid open by the St. Ubes’ road. The strike is there nearly E. and W., and the dip N. at angles varying from 30° to 50°. The eastern end of the Serra de San Luiz consists of the same rock, also dipping N. at about 50°. The conglomerate forms all the higher parts of the Serra de \izo, and the coast to the beginning of the Serra de Arrabida. Along this line there is great variation in the dip of the beds : at the east end of the Serra de Vizo, the inclination is south about 50°; more to the west it is in some places vertical, and at others 50° to the north ; while at the Torre de Outao, at the foot of the Serra de Arrabida, it is N.E. about 70°.
   The lowest beds of the formation are not seen in this neighbourhood, nor is the rock upon which they rest.
   A conglomerate of similar character is largely developed upon the banks of the Vouga, and overlies mica-slate a little to the south of Oporto.
PART II.—IGNEOUS ROCKS.
   It remains for me to describe the igneous rocks which occur near Lisbon, and to point out the alterations which they appear to have caused in the position of the aqueous formations.
Basalt. 
   The principal deposit of this rock forms one of the most important features in the geology of the district; but it extends so irregularly on the west and north of Lisbon, that its range can be understood only by referring to the map. Its extreme length, from Sta Catarina on the Tagus to its northern boundary near Bucellas, is about twenty miles, but its width varies greatly. Besides this immense sheet of basalt, many of the hills around Oeiras, near the mouth of the Tagus, are capped by masses of the same rock, which have evidently been separated from it by the excavation of the intervening valleys. The extent of country occupied by this deposit cannot be less than eighty square miles, the whole of which appears to have been covered by one eruption ; and if, as is probable, the basalt reaches far under the tertiary beds, the amount of the eruption must have been greater.
   The basalt varies much in character: in some places it is a hard massive rock without any marked joints ; elsewhere it occurs in large blocks approaching in form to regular polygons ; occasionally it is columnar, and often it is merely an indurated black clay, with an unequal schistose cleavage, splitting into very irregular rhombs. It is usually compact, but frequently amygdaloidal or slightly crystalline; and these varieties commonly pass into each other. The best columns of basalt are at the summit of Cabeca de Montachique to the north-west of Loures; some less perfect occur at the foot of a battery called Forte de San Jofio das Maias, on the bank of the Tagus, near Oeiras.
   The only beds which rest upon the basalt belong to the tertiary series; they cover its south-eastern edge, and were deposited after the cessation of the basaltic eruption. The position of the basalt with regard to the secondary formations, deserves particular attention. That part of the great deposit to the west of Loures, breaks the continuity of the secondary strata (see PL XIV. and PI. XV. Sect. 0 and 8), both the red sandstone and Hippurite limestone being divided by it into two portions. The beds which lie to the northward of the basalt are nearly horizontal, and are usually overlaid by that rock ; while on the southern side of the basalt, the red sandstone is elevated into bold steep hills, in which the beds dip to the S.E. at angles varying from 40° to 70°, and in one instance to 90°. The Hippurite limestone, resting upon the southern edge of this line of red sandstone, has partaken of the same movement, and dips in the same direction from 30° to 45°, the greatest elevation of both of these formations occuring in the narrow ridge of hills extending from Canessas towards Loures. The basalt also rests upon the southern foot of this elevated ridge of Hippurite limestone, and thence it reaches to the Tagus, the elevation of the limestone gradually diminishing, and the sheet of basalt thinning off to the southward, till, along the bank of the river, the basalt rests upon nearly horizontal beds of the limestone (see Coast Section 3), filling up hollows in the surface, and gradually diminishing in thickness till it is lost near Oeiras. On the north-west of Loures the basalt spreads over the Hippurite limestone (there inclined about 20°) in the same manner, and thins away toward the N.E. till it totally disappears without reaching the Tagus.
   It is therefore evident, that the whole of this great mass of basalt was thrown up after the deposition of the last of the secondary and before that of the oldest of the tertiary formations, through a great cleft in the secondary rocks which extended westward from the site of the village of Loures; that the eruption of the basalt elevated the ridge of red sandstone and Hippurite limestone to the south of the cleft; and that the whole of the rest of the deposit of basalt, ranging N.E. toward Verdelha and southward to the mouth of the Tagus, flowed out through the narrow gorge behind Loures, and spread itself in all directions.
   In no spot does the basalt appear to have passed the present line of the Tagus, and in some parts, as already stated, it has not even reached it, thinning away oh the north near Verdelha, and at the entrance to Lisbon from Campolide.
    The section in the cliff of Cascaes Bay (PI. XV. Sect. 10) affords a good example of the disturbing power of basalt. About a quarter of a mile cast of Cascaes a perpendicular wall of basalt, thirty feet thick, rises from the beach to the height of twenty feet; and a few hundred yards farther two smaller basaltic dykes rise in a similar manner. The basalt can be seen only on the beach, as the dykes run inland, and are entirely covered by the red sandstones belonging to the upper division of that formation, constituting the cliffs with the adjacent country, and containing the sulphureous and lignite beds before described. The disturbance produced by the basalt is so great, that eleven considerable faults occur in the cliff within half a mile ; and to the same cause must be attributed the greater dip of the strata of red sandstone in this district than to the westward of Cascaes. The line of elevation which begins at Cascaes Bay runs north-east to the steep ridge of hills already mentioned between Canessas and Loures, so that all the red sandstone between Cascaes and Loures is thrown up in the same direction, dipping to the S.E. From this it may be concluded, that the whole of that range of hills was elevated by one basaltic eruption; and although we cannot trace the basalt below the surface along the line, still, as it has burst through the strata at one extremity and upheaved them at the other, the whole must be attributed to one cause, and the dykes at Cascaes considered to belong to the same period as the basalt of the great eruption near Loures.
   Between Loures and San Estevao das Gales a mass of basalt caps a hill of Hip- purite limestone, the beds of which dip both from the north and south sides of the hill toward the centre. This is the only spot where such an irregularity is met with, and it may have been caused by a small eruption of basalt through the centre of the bill. In any case, the cap is of the same epoch as the basalt already described.
   On the beach to the west of Cezimbra, some masses of basalt have been intruded between the beds of red sandstone, and may perhaps be of the same age as the above. They have greatly disturbed the strata of sandstone, but the form of the coast does not admit of the effects being well shown in a section. This is the only spot south of the Tagus, where I met with basalt.
   To return to the north of the Tagus. Many hills of red sandstone to the north of the great eruption are capped with detached masses of basalt; several of which are marked upon the map, but there are probably many others. At Sobral and San Sebastiao are two very large masses, and there are some near Chilleiros and Areas north of Cintra (Sect. 2 and 6). In all these cases, the basalt rests upon undisturbed beds of sandstone, and there is nothing to lead to the supposition, that the hills were the vents of eruption ; still it would not be safe to consider the cappings as parts of the great sheet of basalt around Loures, and their origin and date must be left uncertain. One mass, about three miles N.W. of Cintra, and near Fontanellas, deserves separate mention. It appears to be of an older date than the red sandstone; and though there is no section showing the junction of the two rocks, yet, as far as I could observe, the beds of sandstone rest horizontally upon the basalt, which is of a more porphyritic character than is usual in this district.
   Although I had innumerable opportunities of examining the junction of the subjacent rocks with the basalt, which rests in different places upon nearly every bed of the red sandstone and Hippurite limestone, I could not find a single instance of the stratified rocks having been altered by it. The basalt invariably lies immediately upon the formation below, without the intervention of any foreign materials ; except in a quarry on the west side of the valley of Alcantara, where a deposit, such as might have been formed by the rolling forward of the mass of basalt, occurs between that rock and the Hippurite limestone. The section is as follows:—	,
   The beds of trap interstratified with the slate-clay around Cintra having been described, it is unnecessary to recur to them, except to repeat that they are much older than the great mass of Lisbon basalt, and contemporaneous with the formation of shale.
   An eruption of trap-rock at the northern foot of the conical hill on which stands the Moorish castle of Cezimbra, has elevated the Espichel limestone and the red sandstone to a high angle. The rock is an amygdaloid, consisting principally of felspar and green earth. The limestone dips at 70° from the trap on the northern, eastern, and southern sides of the hill, and the red sandstone inclines in the same directions at angles varying from 45° to 60°. 
   The limestone, for the thickness of fifty feet above the trap, is more crystalline than usual. There is nothing to point out the period of the eruption.
GRANITIC ROCKS.
   The range of hills which extends from Cintra to the Atlantic, consists of granitic rocks. Its greatest length from San Pedro to the lighthouse on Cape Rock is about seven, and its extreme width about four miles. The highest points are not 2000 feet above the sea, yet they possess all the picturesque character of alpine scenery.
   The prevailing rock is granite, consisting of nearly equal proportions of quartz and felspar, with a little mica ; but it sometimes contains magnetic iron-ore, disseminated in small grains. Along the whole chain, the central parts of the hills are formed of a coarse-grained granite, which splits into large irregular blocks; and the outer portions of a soft fine-grained granite with a schistose cleavage. In some places the grain is so fine and the cleavage into rhombs so marked, that the rock might easily be mistaken for sandstone if we were not able to trace the passage into a granite presenting its usual characters. Near Cintra the thickness of this schistose granite is not great, but near the lighthouse it is more considerable, and its peculiarity of character more marked. Link*, in describing this neighbourhood, seems in doubt about its nature, and calls it granite passing into sandstone. On the road to the lighthouse are many instances of veins of the hard larger-grained granite in the schistose granite ; but the varieties pass into one another, showing that they were all formed at the same time.
   Toward the western end of the chain, sieuitic and porphyritic rocks occur in several places; and the chapel of the Peninha stands upon the junction of a mass of decomposed felspar-porphyry with the granite. Near Atalaya, I picked up some loose specimens of handsome red porphyry in the bed of a torrent. There is no section of the relative positions of the granite, sienite and porphyry; but from all I could see, I consider them to have been formed contemporaneously.
   The granite is in several places intersected by veins, particularly near the western end of the chain. Near Atalaya it is traversed by a very thin vein of granite quite distinct from the mass of the rock; and in a ravine near the same place two veins traverse the granite, one being horizontal, about two feet thick, and of a sienitic character, the other perpendicular and of less importance. Both these veins pass so gradually into the granite, that they must have been formed at the same period with it. Near Cintra I met with a specimen of granite intersected by several veins, some of them not thicker than a sheet of paper ; and they are too thin to have been formed by an injection of granitic matter into a crack. Near the Peninha chapel thin veins of granite traverse the porphyry.
FAULTS AND DISLOCATIONS.
   
   Few districts offer such good opportunities of studying the question of elevation as that of Cintra. The granite rises to the height of nearly 2000 feet in one mass of moderate extent and at a great distance from any similar rock, so that the effect which it has produced upon the position of the surrounding strata may be investigated as a single problem.
   Sections 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7, show the position of the secondary formations on every side of the Cintra hills; each of them being drawn in a different direction from the granite as from a centre, so as to show the position of all the formations near the granite, both with reference to that rock and to each other. In Nos. 2 and 5, extending north from the granite, the three lowest formations, the San Pedro limestone, the shale, and the Espichel limestone are seen greatly elevated, and dipping from the granite at angles varying from 20° to 80°.
   The coast bein°- very rough, I could not trace Section 5 so far as the preceding one, but the two agree to the extent they can be compared. In these sections and in No. 4 all the beds of Espichel limestone have not been equally affected ; and from some cause not apparent, there is another line of elevation parallel to that caused by the granite, which has raised some of the beds of limestone into a saddle.
   In Sections 1 and 7, which show the south-east and south sides of the chain, the San Pedro limestone, shale, and Espichel limestone are also raised by the granite, dipping from it at angles varying from 30° to 70°, the angle always increasing as the bed approaches the granite. Around these two sides of the hills the disturbing forces have been fewer, and the elevation of the three formations is very regular.
   Section No. 4, drawn from the palace at Cintra to the N.E., offers irregularities which require particular notice. The San Pedro limestone is raised into a saddle, and the slate-clay dips from it on both sides, abutting against the granite, below the palace. The form of the whole mass of granite being nearly triangular, the strata which rest upon it have two principal lines of strike, parallel to the northern and south-eastern edges of the granite range ; these two lines meet at a sharp angle just below the town of Cintra, and at their point of intersection the beds are forced up into a saddle, accompanied by several minor dislocations, one of which is shown in Section 4.
   As the sections round the granite agree in representing the three oldest formations as resting at high inclinations upon that rock, we must conclude, that the granite was elevated to its present position after the deposition of the Espichel limestone, the newest of those formations.
   Let us now examine the question with regard to the next formation, the red sandstone. Section 2 represents the sandstone resting nearly horizontally upon the elevated beds of Espichel limestone, and the want of conformity is the more apparent, as the sandstone rests upon the basset edges of the limestone, and dips in a contrary direction. There is also a want of conformity between the same beds on the south side of the Cintra chain. These two sections prove conclusively, that the sandstone was deposited after the elevation of the rocks below it, and after the granite had assumed its present height. There are, however, other sections bearing upon the case; in No. 4, the beds of sandstone are almost conformable with the uppermost beds of the limestone, but the beds of both rocks are so nearly horizontal, that no argument can be drawn from them. In Sections No. 1 and 7 there is also a conformity between these two formations, the sandstone dipping from the granite at angles of 20° and 30°. This seems to militate against the conclusion just drawn ; but the map shows, that these sections cross that ridge of sandstone hills extending from Cascaes to Loures, which has been proved to have been raised at a later period by the basalt; and their inclined position is thus accounted for without reference to the eruption of the granite. We may therefore assume that the granite-hills of Cintra were elevated to their present position between the formation of the Espichel limestone and that of the red sandstone. The change produced by the granite upon the limestone in contact with it, has been already described at p. 123.
Disturbance of the Strata between Palmella and Cape Espichel. (PI. XV. Sect. 1, 9, 11 to 13.)
   The country between these two places forms so distinct a geological district, that its numerous disturbances deserve to be described apart. Sections 9, 11, 12 and 13, are drawn nearly parallel to one another across this district, to illustrate the dislocations of the strata, by exhibiting all the positions in which the beds lie with respect to each other, and they show that there have been considerable elevations at four distinct periods at least.
   1st. The unconformable manner in which the Espichel limestone rests upon the older red conglomerate, shows that the latter had been elevated before the deposition of the former. 
   2ndly. The position of the red sandstone upon the older rocks (Sections 9, 11 and 13), proves thaf these were again elevated after the deposition of the Espichel limestone.
   3rdly. The position of the Almada beds upon the red sandstone at the end of the Serra de San Luiz (Sect. 1), shows that the sandstone had been much elevated before the tertiary period.
   Lastly. The tertiary Almada beds have been much elevated all round the older chains ; their usual dip being about 30°, but at Palmella it is 50° (Sec. 9), and at the foot of the Serra deYizo nearly 80° (Sec. 13).
   The forces which elevated this district acted at each period in the same direction along an anticlinal line ranging S.S.E. from the castle of Palmella. A considerable fault, crossing the red sandstone between Cezimbra and Cabo de Ayres, forms the western limit of these elevations, and has divided the neighbourhood of Cezimbra into two districts of disturbance. The dislocating agents are not visible on the east of the fault, but to the westward the trap-rock described at p. 127 rises at the northern foot of the castle of Cezimbra, elevating the Espichel limestone and the red sandstone to a great angle (Section 12). From this spot to Cape Espichel the same formations continue to dip highly to the north ; and from the position of the beds, it is probable, that some other eruptive rocks may be found at the foot of the cliffs west of Cezimbra, which I had not time to visit. On the beach on the west side of Cezimbra are some large blocks of sienite, which could not have come from far, and which were probably derived from the foot of the cliffs further on.
   All these disturbing forces had ceased to act before the deposition of the upper tertiary sand which was deposited when all the other strata formed a surface similar to that we now see ; the only alteration which has affected this formation being that which has raised it above the level of the sea without breaking its original horizontality.
SUPERFICIAL DETRITUS.
  The valleys near Lisbon are often lined with detritus washed down from the hills inclosing them, but I did not see any of those accumulations of foreign materials which we have been accustomed to call diluvium. Some of the limestone hills, especially about Bellas and Loures, have been very much channeled by water, and the top of one hill near the latter village is covered by isolated rocks, several feet high, of limestone still remaining in situ, but worn into rounded masses separated by deep channels. This may have taken place during the tertiary period, for there is no evidence that the district has been washed over, since the deposition of the tertiary formations, by any of those immense bodies of water of which we see so many traces in other countries.
APPENDIX.
On the Earthquake of 1755.
  The physical effects of the great earthquake which destroyed part of Lisbon in 1755, have been very much exaggerated. The accounts of the great loss of life and destruction of property carry away the imagination, and lead us to think the geological action of the earthquake much greater than it really was. A large part of the present town consists of houses erected before the catastrophe, and of the buildings destroyed, nearly as many were consumed by fire as overthrown by the shocks.
   With the help of a verydetailed account of each parish in Lisbon, published in 1758 by Joao Baptista de Castro, in the fifth volume of his ‘Mappa de Portugal’, and after a careful examination of the age of the principal buildings, I coloured a map of Lisbon in such a manner as to show the violence of the earthquake in the different parts of the town. No mischief whatever was done westward of a line which nearly corresponds with the Rua de San Bento. J.B. deCastro’s assertion of this fact is very decisive, and there are two structures further west which would have been the first to have fallen, had the shock been as violent in that district as in the centre of the town: the great bridge of the aqueduct over the valley of Alcantara was not injured, a prevalent tradition also says, that only one stone of the parapet was thrown down by the earthquake ; and the beautiful gothic church of St. Jerome at Belem, with its lofty stone roof supported upon very slender columns, remains uninjured.
   The principal force of the earthquake was confined to the valley reaching from the public walk to the Terreiro do Pago and to the low streets which run along the side of the river from the corn-market as far as Boa Vista ; the lower parts of the adjoining hills also suffered considerably; but beyond these limits, the damage done was not great : the quarter of Alfama, behind the castle, consists entirely of old houses, and the northern suburbs suffered but little.
   I next inquired whether the district thus selected by the earthquake corresponded with the distribution of the strata on which the city stands. It is never easy to determine the exact boundaries of strata beneath a town; still the irregular, unfinished manner in which Lisbon is built, the unevenness of the ground, and a number of drains which were opened in different parts of the town, enabled me to form a tolerable geological survey. The west end of the city stands upon the Hippu- rite limestone, and the rest upon the Almada beds, which are nearly horizontal, and overlie the Hippurite limestone unconformably, so that the lower tertiary beds are not brought up to the surface at the junction of the two formations; all the higher parts of the town stand upon the upper Almada beds, and the lower streets upon the blue clay, which has been left exposed by the denudation of the upper beds.
   On comparing my two maps of the city, I found a very striking resemblance, which I had not expected. The greatest force of the earthquake was confined to the area of the blue clay, and not one of the buildings which stood upon that bed escaped ; those upon the slopes of the hills standing upon the beds immediately above the clay, suffered very severely, and the whole of the tertiary strata were more or less affected by the shocks. On the contrary, all the buildings erected upon the Hippurite limestone and the basalt escaped entirely; the line at which the force of the earthquake ceased to be destructive, corresponding exactly with the boundary of the tertiary beds.
   The earthquake did not destroy many buildings in the neighbourhood of Lisbon, but I could not find any account of the extent of the damage done ; yet the little evidence I obtained, corresponds with that derived from the interior of the town. Saccavem, which stands upon the upper Almada beds, is said to have suffered considerably; but Queluz and Odivellas, built upon basalt, were not damaged. The bridge of the aqueduct, already mentioned as having escaped, stands across the junction of the basalt and the Hippurite limestone. It is therefore evident, that the violence of the earthquake was quite unconnected with the presence of basalt, with which Link and others have attempted to connect it.

   Since the preceding paper was laid before the Society, a more complete examination of the fossils has altered some of the views I at first entertained as to the age of the secondary deposits; I had thought the following to be equivalents :
   I am now disposed to consider all those three formations referrible to the cretaceous series of the North of Europe ; following in this respect the opinion of MM. Boblave and Virlet, who refer to that series a similar succession of beds observed by them in the Morea, although I cannot quite agree with those gentlemen in identifying the separate beds of the South with individual deposits of the North of Europe.
  Hippurite Limestone: as this is a calcareous deposit forming the upper part of the cretaceous series, and nearly all its shells belong to the chalk and green sand, it may be taken as the equivalent of our chalk.
  Red Sandstone Formation: this contains shells of our green sand mixed with others of the oolites. 
  Espichel Limestone : the Gres vert infe'rieur of the Morea is succeeded, according to the authors above quoted, by blue limestone with beds of argillaceous marl, evidently the equivalents of this Espichel limestone. In both countries, it contains an union of species of the green sand and the coral-rag ; yet the evidence of its connexion with the cretaceous series is very great; for Trigonia scabra, considered by M. Deshayes as one of the most characteristic shells of the green sand, was found in the lowest beds of this formation, as well as Exogyra plicata, the most abundant shell of the Hippurite limestone. Were this the only bed of the series containing shells of our oolites, it might be referred to the Neocomian epoch, and the comparison of the beds of the red sandstone formation with the upper and lowrer green sands might be admitted; but as all the Portuguese deposits from the Hippurite limestone to the Espichel limestone, contain some shells of the coral-rag, I think it safer to refer the whole to the cretaceous epoch, without attempting to identify the beds separately.
   I have not sufficient information about the strata below the Espichel limestone, to attempt to compare them with the English formations.


