IN a former paper, I had the honour of laying before the Society, a pretty full account of the wasting effects of the sea upon the margin of the land, on all the shores of Great Britain, and a part of Ireland. From personal observation since the date of that paper, (read 2d May 1816, and inserted in vol. ii. p. 464. of the Society's Memoirs,) I have been enabled to add many striking examples bearing upon the same point, not only on the British coast, but as referable to all quarters of the globe; the result of which is, that the encroachment of the sea upon the land, may be received as a general principle. On account of the details already given in the former paper, it might appear tedious and unnecessary to enumerate these additional instances; and I shall therefore content myself with referring to it, in [so far as regards the wasting effects of the sea, and proceed to notice the particular tendency of these upon the bed of the German Ocean or North Sea; and endeavour to account, agreeably to the laws of Nature, for the immense quantity of water which must thus be displaced by the deposition of debris, and the consequent elevation of the bottom of the sea.
We are therefore to view the ocean as the great receptacle for the waste of the globe, produced not only by the direct effects of the sea on the margin of the land, but also by the more latent effects arising from the changes of the atmosphere, acting, to a certain extent, in mouldering away the firm ground, which is afterwards transferred to the bed of the ocean. At first sight, the deposition arising from this process, may appear to be a trivial quantity, compared with the great expanse of the ocean; but if we confine our attention to the bed of the North Sea, we find, in the course of our inquiries, that it is by no means so inconsiderable. Great Britain alone, is estimated to contain about 20,000,000 acres of cultivated land; and it is further estimated to possess an extent of about 25,000 miles of principal roads, which expose a surface of upwards of 1000 acres to the constant action of the weather, and to the wearing of carriages. Now, when we consider that every river and rill of water, after the slightest shower of rain, is charged with mud, and that the furrows of every field are silted up with the finer particles of the soil, the quantity of debris which is annually carried from all quarters of the globe into the ocean must be altogether astonishing. We cease, therefore, to be surprised, when we come to calculate the contents of the various extensive sand banks which are found almost universally to pervade and encumber the bottom of the North Sea.
Our knowledge of the bottom of the ocean, however, remains still very imperfect; and, with little exception, the simple apparatus of the mariner, consisting of a plummet and line, continues to be chiefly in use for ascertaining the depth of the sea, and the nature of the ground. With these, and the addition of a little grease applied to the lower extremity of the plummet, which strikes against the bottom, we learn the quality of the soil, though imperfectly, by the particles which adhere to the grease.—What the navigator has yet been able to discover regarding the depth, and the nature of the bottom of the German Ocean, I shall now endeavour to notice, being myself enabled to offer the result of a pretty extensive acquaintance with this field of inquiry.
  It may be necessary to premise, in treating of a subject so extensive, and in comparing great things with small, that we are obliged to speak of the North Sea as a bay or basin, and of the immense collection of debris which we meet with, extending over a great proportion of its bottom, under the common appellation of Sand-Banks. We must also be allowed to consider the undulating line, or the irregularities of the bottom, to arise chiefly from the accumulation of deposited matters; and, in most of the situations connected with these banks, we are supported and borne out in this conclusion, by their local positions relatively to the openings of friths, and the line of their direction in regard to the set or current of the ebb-tide.
The accompanying Map of the eastern coast of Great Britain, with the opposite Continent, though upon a small scale, exhibits numerous soundings of the depth of the German Ocean; and the sections delineated on it, will perhaps be found to give a pretty distinct view of the subject. This chart extends from the coast of France, in latitude 50° 57' to 61° N. On the east, this great basin is bounded by Denmark and Norway, on the west by the British Isles, on the south by Germany, Holland and France, and on the north by the Shetland Islands, and the Great Northern or Arctic Ocean. The term German Ocean, though in very common use, is certainly not so comprehensive in its application to this great basin, as that of North Sea, now more generally used by the navigator. The extent of this sea from south to north, between the parallels of latitude quoted above, is 233 leagues, and its greatest breadth from west to east, reckoning from St Abb's-Head, on the coast of Scotland, to Ring Kiobing Froid, on the opposite shore of Denmark, is 135 leagues. The greatest depth of the water in this basin, seems to be upon the Norwegian side, where the soundings give 190 fathoms; but the mean depth of the whole may be stated at only about 31 fathoms.
  To be more particular with regard to the depth of the German Ocean, or North Sea, it will be observed by the sections and soundings marked upon the chart, that the water gradually deepens as we sail from south to north. The first of these sections which we shall notice, is on the parallel of 3 degrees of east longitude, running from Ostend to the latitude of the northmost of the Shetland Islands, being an extent of 227 leagues. The depth, as will be seen from this section, (which, to avoid confusion in the body of the chart, is traced along the western side of it,) varies rather after an irregular progression, from 120 fathoms towards the northern extremity of this sectional line, to 58, 38, 24 and 18 fathoms, as we proceed southwards, to within five miles of the shore, nearer which we do not approach in our remarks regarding the soundings. Notwithstanding the irregularity of the depth, from the occurrence of numerous sand-banks, it is curious to observe the increase upon the whole, as we proceed from south to north, by which this sea exhibits all the characteristic features of a great bay, encumbered with numerous sand-banks.
  In the same manner, though not strictly connected with our present purpose, we may observe, that the English Channel deepens progressively from Dover to its entrance, formed by the Land's End of England and the Isle of Ushant, on the coast of France; so that the Strait between Dover and Calais may be said to form a point of partition between two great inclined planes, forming the bottom of these seas.
Besides the longitudinal, or north and south sectional line described above, we have also six other sections delineated in an easterly and westerly direction, across the accompanying chart, which are as follow. One between the Shetland Islands and the coast of Norway; a second between Tarbetness in Ross-shire and the Naze of Norway; a third extends from the Frith of Forth to the coast of Denmark; a fourth from the mouth of the river Tyne to Sylt Island, also in Denmark; a fifth from Flamborough-Head, in Yorkshire, to the mouth of the river Elbe; and the sixth is from Yarmouth to Egmond-op-Zee, on the coast of Holland.
  On examining the accompanying cross sections, of the depths of water on the same parallel, they will be found to vary considerably. It may, however, be stated as a general conclusion, that there is a greater depth of water on the eastern and western sides of the German Ocean, than its central parts, and that, upon the whole, it is deeper on the British, than on the continental shores, the coast of Norway excepted.
We have already observed, that this sea is much encumbered with sand-banks, or great accumulations of debris, especially in the middle or central parts, and also along the shores towards what may be termed the apex of the bay, extending from the river Thames, along the shores of Holland, &c. to the Baltic. One of these great central banks, delineated on the chart, and known to mariners as the Long Forties, trends north-east in the direction of the ebb-tide from the entrance of the Frith of Forth, no less than 110 miles, while the Denmark and Jutland banks may also be traced on the chart from the entrance of the Baltic, upwards of 105 miles in a north-western direction. Besides these, we have also another great central range of banks, which is crossed by no fewer than four of our sectional lines. These are known under the common appellation of the Dogger Bank, which is subdivided by the navigator into the Long-Bank, the WhiteBank, and the Well-Bank, including an extent of upwards of 354 miles from north to south. There are also a vast number of shoals and sand-banks, lying wholly to the southward of our section, between Flamborough Head and Heligoland. Altogether, therefore, the superficies of these extensive banks is found to occupy no inconsiderable portion of the whole area of the German Ocean; the surface of which, in making these investigations, has been estimated to contain about 153,709 square miles, while the aggregate superficial contents of the sand-banks alone, amount to no less than 27,443 square miles, or include an area of about 5f of the whole surface of the North Sea.
But to render these dimensions a little more familiar by comparison, we may notice, that the Island of Great Britain contains about 77,244 square miles, being not quite one-half of the area of the North Sea; so that the area of the Sand-banks bears a proportion equal to about one-third of the whole terra firma of England and Scotland; and they are, therefore, perhaps, far more considerable in their extent than has been generally imagined.
  In speaking of the dimensions of sand-banks situate in the middle of the ocean, we are aware that great allowance must be made in forming a proper estimate of their extent, especially in speaking of their cubical contents. From a vast number of observations and comparisons relative to this subject, I have, however, been enabled to determine, that the average height of these banks measures about 78 feet, from a mean taken of the whole. In ascertaining their height above the surrounding bottom, the measurement has been taken from the general depth around each respectively. Now, upon taking the aggregate cubical contents of the whole of these immense collections of debris, supposing the mass to be uniformly the same throughout, it is found to amount to no less a quantity than 2,241,248,563,110 of cubic yards, being equal to about 14 feet of the depth of the whole German Ocean, or to a portion of the firm ground of Great Britain, on a level with the sea, taken 28 feet in perpendicular height or depth, supposing the surface to be a level plane.
These calculations at least tend to shew, that an immense body of water must be displaced, in consequence of these banks occupying so very considerable a proportion of the bed of the North Sea, the unavoidable effect of which must give a direct tendency to the tidal waters, and the flux produced by storms in the Atlantic, to overflow the bed of the German Ocean, in the same manner as if stones or other matter were thrown into a vessel already nearly brimful of water. This may further be illustrated by considering the actual state of any of the great inland lakes, as those of Geneva, Lochness, Loch- lomond, &c. which for ages past have been receiving the debris of the surrounding mountains. We must doubtless allow that they contain a smaller portion of water, or are actually of a less depth than they were at an earlier period of the history of the globe. Accordingly, from inquiries, which, in the prosecution of this subject, I have been led to make regarding the two last mentioned lakes, it has satisfactorily appeared that their waters are subject to overflow or rise upon their banks. On Lochlomond, in particular, the site of a house at the village of Luas was pointed out to me, which is now permanently under the summer-water-mark; while the gable of another house in its neighbourhood is in danger of being washed down by the increase of the waters of the loch. Whether this striking appearance (an account of which I laid before the Society in the session of 1818.) is to be attributed wholly to natural causes, or partly to artificial operations upon the bed of the River Leven, flowing from the loch, I have had no opportunity of inquiring. But the great bench or flat space around the margin of the loch, which is left partly dry during summer, foams altogether such a receptacle for debris, as to be sufficient to affect the surface of the loch, and indeed pennanently to raise its waters. We also infer, though by a different process, that the constant deposition going forward in the bed of the German Ocean, must likewise displace its waters, and give them a tendency to enlarge their bed and to overflow their hanks or boundary.
  In this view of tiic subject, it will appear that we have not only to account for the supply of an immense quantity of debris, but we must also dispose of the water displaced by the process of deposition which is continually going forward at the bottom of the ocean.
With regard, then, to the supply of the debris of which these banks are composed.—We And that a very great portion of it consists of siliceous matters in the form of sand, varying in size from the finest grains to coarse bulky particles, mixed with coral and pounded shells, the quantity of these calcareous matters being altogether astonishingly great; and being specifically lighter than the particles of sand, the shells generally cover the surface of these sunken banks. With regard to the vast collection of siliceous particles connected with the banks, our surprise ceases when we consider the receptacle which the North Sea forms, to an almost unlimited extent of drainage from the surrounding countries, as before noticed, on which the change of the seasons, and the succession of rain and of drought upon the surface of the earth, are unceasingly producing their destructive effects. All have remarked the quantity of mud and debris with which every rill and river is charged, even after the gentlest shower, especially wherever the hand of the agriculturist is to be found. His labours in keeping up the fertilizing quality of the ground, consist in a great measure in preparing a fresh matrix for the chemical process or the germination of the seeds 01 the earth, in lieu of that portion of the finely pulverised soil which the rains are perpetually carrying to the sea, as the grand receptacle and storehouse of nature for these exuviae of the globe. From the effect of rills and rivulets, we should, perhaps, be apt to expect a greater deposition in the bed 01 sheltered bays and arms of the sea, than we really observe. So that we can readily believe that the quantity of debris, even for a single year, along such an extent of coast, may bear some consideration in respect to the bed of the German Ocean; what, then, must these effects amount to, in the lapse of ages?
Whatever be the cause, the fact is certain, that on almost every part of the shores of Great Britain and Ireland, and their connecting islands, from the northmost of the Shetland to the southernmost of the Scilly Islands, and also upon the shores of Holland, and part of France, particularly in the neighbourhood of Cherbourg, this wasting effect is going forward. These shores I have myself examined. But my inquiries have not been confined to the coasts which I have personally visited, having also, through the kind attention of some nautical friends, been enabled to extend my investigations even to the remotest parts of the globe. The general result has been, that, equally in the most sheltered seas, such as the Baltic and Mediterranean, and on the most exposed points and promontories of the coasts of North and South America, and the West India islands, abundant proofs occur, all tending to shew the general waste of the land by the encroachments of the sea- Such wasting effects are quite familiar to those locally acquainted with particular portions of the shores; and I have often received their testimony to these facts, as the sad experience of the removal of buildings, and the inundation of extensive tracts of land by the encroachment of the sea.
Indeed, by a closer inquiry into this department of the subject, we shall, perhaps, find ourselves rather at a loss to account for the smallness of the quantity of this deposition, considering the waste which is constantly going forward in the process of nature, and even be led to seek for its wider distribution over the whole expanse of the bed of the ocean, as has been supposed in that theory of the globe, so beautifully and so ably defended by our late illustrious countryman Professor Playfair.
One of the most striking and general examples of this kind may perhaps be found in the abrupt and precipitous headlands and shores which we every where observe along the coast, and which we suppose to have once been of the same sloping form and declining aspect with the contiguous land. In the production of these effects alone, an immense quantity of debris must have been thrown into the bed of the ocean. The channels which are cut by the sea in the separation of parts of the mainland, and the formation of islands, no doubt make way for a considerable portion of the displaced fluid; but still these channels, when filled with water, come far short, in point of bulk, when compared with the portions of the elevated land which are thus removed. Now, it has been alleged by some, that while the land is wasting at certain points, it is also gaining in others; and this is a state of things which is freely admitted to take place in various quarters; yet these apparent acquisitions are no more to be compared with the waste alluded to, than the drop is to the water of the bucket. But accurate observations regarding the formation of extensive sand-banks, and the accumulation of the debris, of which they are formed, are not to be made in a few years, perhaps not in a century, nor indeed in several centuries; for although the short period of the life of man is sufficient to afford the most incontrovertible proofs of the waste of the land where we become observers, yet when we extend our views to the depths of the ocean, and speak of the events and changes which arc there going forward, we must not be supposed to set limits to time.
  We have many convincing proofs in the natural history of the globe, that the sea has at one time occupied a much higher elevation than at present. On the banks of the Frith of Forth, near Borrowfttounness, for example, I have seen a bed of marine which is several feet in thickness, and has been found to extend about three miles in length, and which is now situate many feet above the present level of the waters of the Forth. A recent illustration of this subject occurred also in the remarkable discoverv of the skeleton of a large whale, found on the lands of Airthrey, near Stirling. The present surface of the ground where the remains of this huge animal were deposited, having been ascertained (by my assistants, when lately in that neighbourhood) to be no less that 24 feet 9 inches above the present level of the Frith of Forth at high water of spring-tides. Now, whether we are to consider these as proofs of the higher elevation of the waters of the ocean in the most general acceptation of the word, at a former period, I will not here attempt to enquire. But aside from these anomalous appearances, there is reason for thinking, that the waters of the higher parts of the Frith of Forth, like those of the Murray Frith, may at one time have formed a succession of lakes, with distinct barriers, as we find in the case of Lochness, and the other lakes forming the track of the Caledonian Canal. My object on the present occasion, however, is simply to notice the wasting effects of the North Sea upon the surrounding land, its deposition in the bottom of the sea, and the consequent production of surplus waters at the surface, and to endeavour to account for these appearances consistently with the laws of nature. The opinion accordingly which I have formed, and the theory which I have humbly to suggest, (for I am not aware that this subject has been before particularly noticed), is, that the silting up of the great basin of the North Sea, has a direct tendency to cause its waters to overflow their banks.
  Referring to the chart, we find that the North Sea is surrounded with land, excepting at two inlets or apertures, the one extending about 100 leagues between the Orkney Islands and the Norwegian coast, and the other between Dover and Calais, which is of the width of 7 leagues. The aggregate water-way of these two passages forms the track for the tidal waters, and also for the surplus waters produced during storms which affect the Atlantic and Arctic Oceans. It is also obvious that this water-way must remain nearly the same, and admit a constant quantity; or, to speak more correctly, by allowing these inlets to follow the general law, they must be enlarged by the waste or wearing of their sides, in a ratio perhaps greater than the silting up of the bottom in those particular parts, while the anterior and central portions of the German Ocean are continually acquiring additional quantities of debris, along with the drainage water of the widely surrounding countries. If therefore the same, or a greater quantity of tidal and surplus waters continue to be admitted from the Atlantic and Arctic Seas into this great basin, where the deposition is constantly going forward, it is evident that the surface of the German Ocean must be elevated in a temporary and proportionate degree, and hence the production of those wasting and destructive effects which are every where observable upon its shores.
This reasoning is also applicable, in a greater or less degree, to all parts of the world; for as the same cause every where exists, the same effects, when narrowly examined, must every where be produced. In the Southern or Pacific Ocean, we have wonderful examples of great masses of laud formed by madrepores and extensive coral banks, which in time assume all the characteristic features of islands. These occupy considerable portions of the watery bed of the ocean, and displace corresponding portions of the fluid. Immense quantities of mud are also said to be deposited in the Yellow Sea of China, in the great deltas formed at the mouths of the Ganges, the Plate, the Amazons, the Missisippi, the St Lawrence, the Nile, the Rhine, and other large rivers, whose joint operation both at the surface and bottom of the ocean, are continually carrying forward the same great process of displacing the waters of the ocean; for it matters not to this question whether the debris of the higher country which are carried down by the rains and rivers, or are occasioned by the direct waste produced by the ocean itself on the margin of the land, be deposited at the bottom or surface of the ocean; they must still be allowed to displace an equal or greater bulk of the fluid, and have therefore a direct tendency to produce the derangement which we are here endeavouring to describe.
  A striking illustration of this doctrine may be drawn from M. Girard's able and ingenious observations on the delta of Egypt, made in 1799, and published in the Mem. de I'Acad, for 1817, in a memoir Sur la Valine d'Egypte, et sur Veochaussernent seculaire du Sol qui la recouvre. It appears that the whole soil of the "Valley of the Nile" is very considerably increased by the alluvium deposited annually by the inundations of the river, as ascertained by the marks on some ancient nilometers and statues, the dates of which have been traced and compared by Girard, with the corresponding historical periods. In the quarter of Thebes, where the statue of Memnon is erected, the increase of the soil since the commencement of the Christian era, is lm.924 (6 feet 3.7 inches), or this process may be stated as going forward at the rate of 0m.106 (4.17 inches), in the course of each century. The magnitude of the deposites at the mouths of the Nile in the bed of the Mediterranean appears to be no less surprising. It is remarked, that the Isle of Pharos, which, in the time of Homer, was a day's journey from the coast, is now united to the continent.
  If, then, we compare these effects with the same process, going forward in a certain proportionate rate over all parts of the globe, and where the same facilities for these depositions being made on firm ground are pot afforded, we shall find that the quantity of deposite in the bottom of the ocean must be so considerable as to affect the level of the waters of the ocean.
  In thus disposing of the waste of the surrounding land beyond the accumulation of the sunken banks of the German Ocean, we arc not left at any loss for a distributing cause, as this is provided by the tides and currrents of the sea; and with regard to their action, we have many proofs, even at very considerable depths, by the breaking up of the wrecks of ships, the occasional drift of sea-weed, and also drift timber, nuts, &c. into regions far distant from those in which they are spontaneously produced. The dispersion of fishes, evinced by their disappearance from the fishing grounds in stormy weather, tends to shew the disturbance of the waters of the ocean to the depth of 30 or 40 fathoms. This observation I have frequently had an opportunity of making near the entrance of the Frith of Forth. Numerous proofs of the sea being disturbed to a considerable depth have also occurred since the erection of the Bell Rock Lighthouse, situate upon a sunken rock in the sea, 12 miles off Arbroath, in Forfarshire. Some drift stones of large dimensions, measuring upwards of 30 cubic feet, or more than two tons weight, have, during storms, been often thrown upon the rock from the deep water. These large boulder-stones are so familiar to the lightkeepers at this station, as to be by them termed travellers. It is therefore extremely probable, that a large portion of the debris is carried down with the drainage water of the higher country, as before noticed, and ultimately washed out of the North Sea into the expanse of the ocean.
The question which naturally arises as to the result of all this waste or transposition of the solid matters of a large portion of the globe, is. What has become of the body of water displaced by this wasting process? Without attempting to go into all the minutiae of this part of the subject, I shall here briefly observe, that there seems to exist (if I may be allowed so to express myself) a kind of compensating arrangement between the solid or earthy particles of the globe in the one case, and the waters of the ocean in the other. Thus by the process of evaporation, and the universal application of water, which enters so largely, in its simple or chemical state, into the whole animate and inanimate creation, the surface of the ocean may be kept nearly at a uniform level. Phenomena of this description are, no doubt, difficult in their solution upon the great scale, being met by the process of decomposition, which resolves bodies into their constituent parts, and also by our theory of the atmosphere, by which its limits and operations are determined. But were we to abstract our attention from the more general view of the subject, and confine our inquiries to the German Ocean, the Baltic, the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, or to any other inland and circumscribed parts of the ocean, this difficulty seems to be lessened. Indeed, the probability is, and it is a pretty generally received opinion, that a greater quantity of water is actually admitted at the Straits of Gibraltar and of Babelmandel, than flows out of the Mediterranean and Red Seas. We consider water, therefore, as the great pabulum of nature, which, as before noticed, enters either simply or chemically into the constitution of all bodies, and appears to be held, almost exclusively, in solution, in the formation and maintenance of the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms, and is found to exist largely in the composition of all mineral substances. The quantity of water, consequently, that is required, and is continually supplied from the ocean by the process of evaporation, both for the support and reanimation of nature, must be immense, and may of course be supposed permanently to absorb a very large proportion of the surplus waters of these circumscribed seas, while the remaining portion of surplus water, if not thus wholly accounted for, may be distributed over the general expanse of the ocean.
But if we suppose with some, that in nature there is neither an excess nor diminution of the waters of the globe, and that the united and counterbalancing processes of evaporation, condensation, decomposition, and regeneration, so completely equalize each other, that the surplus waters, arising from the displacement of a portion of the solid surface of the globe, must again be wholly distributed and intermixed with the waters of the ocean, the portion of water remaining thus to be accounted for becomes more considerable, and, upon the great scale, must be permanently disposed of, independently of the process of evaporation.
Another view has been suggested as applicable to the distribution of the surplus waters produced by the gradual filling up of the bed of the ocean. These waters, in place of being elevated in any sensible degree, may be naturally disposed to find their level in the great Polar Basins, or oblate portions of the surface of the globe which are known to exist next the poles. The oblate figure of the earth at the poles makes these imaginary points the nearest to the centre of the earth, and consesequently, with regard to level, they are also the lowest. It therefore appears to follow, that any filling up of the bed of the sea near the equator, or at a distance from the poles, will have the effect of promoting the retiring of the surplus waters to the polar regions by their own gravity, while the centrifugal force occasioned by the earth's diurnal motion, will prevent their being farther removed from the equator, without a corresponding elevation of the waters in the great polar basons.
  In this manner, such an accumulation of water may, at a former period of time, have taken place at the then Poles of the Globe, as to have altered the position of these points, and given rise to the Flood or temporary general overflowing of the waters over the earth's surface, producing a change in the beds of the seas or oceans of former times. In this way may have been produced many of the phenomena observable in the crust of the earth,. which are otherwise with much difficulty accounted for.
  Of what has now been advanced, regarding the waste of the land by the operations of the sea, it will be proper to notice, that much consists with my own personal observation. The consequences of this process must be the deposition of debris, and a tendency to raise the bottom of the ocean, and produce a proportional elevation of the water. With regard, however, to the distribution of the surplus waters that is produced, what I have now said is offered with much deference, in hopes that some one better qualified than myself will turn his attention to this curious subject.

