
IN the course of making professional inquiries regarding the impression which the tidal waters of the Frith of Forth are making upon some of the most valuable properties situated "upon its banks, I have been imperceptibly led to compare these with other observations that have occurred to me in a pretty extensive survey of the coast of Great Britain and Ireland. On this subject, involving not only an important question regarding the Economical Interest of the country at large, but also some points connected with the Natural History of the globe, I shall lay before the Society what occurs to me, in hopes that it may at least

have the effect of turning the attention of more skilful observers to its further elucidation.
   I am therefore, in this introductory' paper, to endeavour to prove, that the tidal waters of the British Channel and German Ocean, are acting Upon the coast of this kingdom, and wasting its shores, by a constant and almost invariable progress. This is, perhaps, more or less obvious to every one ; but I shall here bring it more distinctly under the notice of the Society, in so far as my intercourse with the different parts of the coast has afforded an opportunity of observing; and shall add such collateral remarks as may occur in the course of this inquiry. Having in this manner established the point with regard to the wasting of the shores or margin of the land next the sea, I shall, in a future communication, inquire into the cause of this wasting, and endeavour to account for it. Without supposing it to proceed from an increase of the waters of the ocean, or to depend upon any adventitious circumstances connected with the natural state of the tides, I propose to shew that it proceeds from a change upon the level or depth of the alveus, or general bed, of the German Ocean and British Channel.
   It would open a field of inquiry too widely extended, to enter upon the evidence of the water of the ocean having in former ages occupied a

much higher level than it now does. As already said, I am only at present to trace the encroaching or wasting effects of the sea upon the land. In doing this, I shall begin with the shores of the Frith of Forth, and then proceed northward along the eastern coast to the Moray Frith, Caithness, and the Orkney and Shetland Islands; next slightly notice the Lewis, and the western parts of Scotland ; and then turn my attention to the eastern shores of England, and to the British and St George’s Channels. From the extent of coast just alluded to, it will be obvious, that I can take but a very slight and partial view of the effects of the sea upon the shores at particular bays and creeks, which might deserve further illustration.
   The wasting operations of the sea are not confined to the more exposed parts of the coast, but are observable in our most sheltered seas, upon both sides of the Frith of Forth westward, or above Queensferry, where the shores are defended on all sides from the violent attacks of the sea in stormy weather : Even in this narrow part of the Frith, we find that the land is gradually washed away by the tides, as, for example, at Lord DUNDAS’S estate at Grangemouth, and all the southern shore by the estate of Kinniel and the Earl of HOPETOUN’S lands, to Queensferry at whichr place the track of the public road is now literally within sea-mark, although at no great

distance of time it was defended from the sea by a tract of land. The same remarks are strictly applicable to the shores on the northern side at Culross, and along the estates of Sir ROBERT PRESTON and Lord ELGIN, and all the way to North Queensferry. From an inspection of the charts of the coast, it will appear, that these effects are not likely to have been produced from any particular exposure, as this part of the Frith is completely land-locked, and is otherwise well sheltered from storms. These appearances would therefore seem to imply a change upon the level of the ocean, occasioning an overfilling of the various inlets of the sea.
   Below Queensferry, or to the eastward of it, these effects are perhaps still more remarkable. On the southern side of the Frith at Barnbougle Castle, the seat of the Earl of ROSEBERY, in former times there was a lawn of considerable extent on the eastern front, and on both sides of the castle : This lawn is now completetly washed away by the sea, and it has long since been found necessary to erect a bulwark for the safety of the castle, which is rapidly approaching to an insulated state, so that the Noble Proprietor has in some measure been under the necessity of building a new mansion-house upon a more elevated situation. Tracing the same shore, along the rocky boundary of Granton and Royston, to Wardy and Newhaven, we are no less struck with

the powerful effects of this element. Between Newhaven and Leith, where the subsoil consiste of strong clay overlaid by a deep cover of alluvial matters, it is in the recollection of some old fishermen still living, that an extensive piece of Link ground or Downs existed in front of the lands of Anchorfield and along these shores, on which they used formerly to dry their nets, and which is now entirely washed away. From, the fishing village of Newhaven to Leith, the direct road was along shore on the northern side of Leith Fort; but the road being now carried wholly away, and the sea having penetrated considerably into a field on the eastern side of the houses of Anchorfield, the carriage road takes a circuitous route by another way ; and there is reason for believing, that at a former period the land here 'had' extended, probably as far to the northward as the Martello Tower or Black Rocks.
   Of the wasting effects of the sea on the shores of the shire of Edinburgh, some striking proofs are adduced, and others may be drawn from MAITLAND’S History of Edinburgh in which he speaks of a tract of land on both sides of the Port of Leith, which has now wholly disappeared. In particular, at Newhaven, a village which appears to have been established in the beginning of the 15th century, by King JAMES the IV., who there caused a harbour to be constructed for the reception of vessels, and a dock-yard or arsenal,

   with rope-works for building and fitting out ships, the remains of which, as also of a glass and salt work, were visible in 1750, when MAITLAND wrote.
He mentions, also, that the great ravages of the sea upon the coast, between Leith and Musselburgh, have occasioned the “ public road to be divers times removed further into the country, and the land being now violently assaulted by the sea on the eastern and northern sides, all must give way to its rage, and the Links of South Leith probably in less than half a century will be swallowed up.”
It is also well known, that this process has in nowise abated, as the road alluded to has of late years been again and again removed from the sea, and is now in some places defended by bulwarks of stone, to preserve the present line. Even the New Baths erected but a few years since at a considerable distance from the high-water mark, have now barely the breadth of the high-way between them and the sea, which has overthrown the bulwark or fence in front of these buildings, and is now acting upon the road itself.
   Proceeding along the southern shores of the Haddington Frith of Forth from Leith to Berwick-upon-  Tweed, many instances are afforded of the waste of the land by the sea. The shores near Musselburgh, at Morison’s Haven, and Prestonpans, have suffered greatly from the sea. An instance of this is remarked of the link-ground or downs of the former place, where JAMES, Duke of Albany and 

Fife.
York, when he resided at Pinkie House in that neighbourhood, used to take the amusement of golf; but now these extensive grounds are almost entirely swept away. The Earl of Wemyss’s lands of Gosford, Gullenness, and all the shores extending from Dirleton Common to North Berwick, the Earl of Haddington’s lands of Tyningham, Dunbar, Broxmouth, Dunglass, to St Abb’s Head, Eyemouth, and the River Tweed, all bear the marks of wasting. To enter into particulars as to the appearances upon these shores, would be prolix, and perhaps uninteresting: But at all of them, I have been eye-witness to the rapid waste of the land, and the progressive encroachment of the sea.	
  If we turn our attention to the northern shores of the Frith of Forth, we shall find instances of the same kind no less remarkable. Of these may be mentioned the shores at the estates of the Earls of Moray and Morton, and Mr Ferguson pf Raith, the damage done to numerous properties bounded by the sea, at the towns of Kirkcaldy and Dysart, and the very remarkable and fantastic appearance of the rocks, produced by the wasting effects of the sea, along the shores in the neighbourhood of Wemyss Castle; indeed, all the towns from Methil to Fifeness, particularly the Elie, Wester-Anstruther and Crail, have suffered by the en-  croachments of the sea, which, in some instances in this quarter, has also taken away parts of the public roads, thrown down the inclosures of gar-

dens and fields, laid waste the piers, and even undermined and carried away dwelling-houses,. In the parish of Grail, some slender remains of a Priory existed so late as the year 1803, which are now washed entirely away, with its ancient gardens, &c.; but the adjoining grounds still retain the name of the Croft Lands of the Priory. The point called Fifeness, affords another proof of the desolating effects of the sea upon the land. The section of the coast here exhibits strata of a very soft and friable sandstone, with ironstone and shale. This section I have distinctly traced between Fifeness and the Carr Rock, which lies about a mile and a half off Fifeness : the whole distance between it and the shore forms a tract of shoals and half-tide rocks; and as this series of rocks, so easily worn away by the sea, can again be traced near Kingsbarns, at the opposite side of the bay, it seems extremely probable, that, at no very distant period in the history of the globe, this space between the Carr Rock and the land of Fifeness, may have consisted of firm ground. Along the shores of Balcomie and Cambo, belonging to the Earl of Kellie, and the estate of Pitmilly, considerable sums have been expended in building and re-building fences against‘the encroachments of the sea ; and, indeed, many of the proprietors along the shores of the Frith of Forth, finding this an endless task, have, for the present, given it up as a hopeless case. At St Andrew’s

Forfar and Kincardine
the famous castle of Cardinal Beatoun, which is said originally to have been at some distance from the sea, now almost overhangs it; and, indeed, this fine ruin must ere long fall a prey to the waves : from St Andrew’s, northward to Eden Water and the River Tay, the coast presents a sandy beach, and is so liable to shift, that it is difficult to trace the changes it may have undergone. It is certain, however, that within the last century, the sea has made such an impression upon the Sands of Barry, on the northern side of the Tay, that the light-houses at the entrance of that river, which were formerly erected at the southern extremity of Buttonness, have been from time ;to time removed about a mile and a quarter farther northward, on account of the wasting and shifting of these sandy shores, and that the spot on which the outer light-house stood early in the seventeenth century, is now two or three fathoms under water, and is at least three quarters of a mile within flood-mark. These facts I state from information obligingly communicated to me by George Clark, Esq. Master of the Trinity-House, Dundee, from the records of that, corporation. From the Tay all the way along the coast of Forfar and Kincardine to Stonehaven, the shores exhibit rocks of secondary or newer formations, as sandstone and breccia, and here the effects of the sea are in many places very perceptible : particularly about half a mile to the westward of the town of Ar-

broath, where the public road bounds the sea
shore. Within, the last thirty years, the Trustees
for the highways have been under the necessity of
removing the road twice within the fields; and this
operation it has now become again necessary to re-
peat, for the safety of the traveller. The shores
of the estate of Seaton in this neighbourhood, and
the Earl of Northesk’s estate of Aithie, including
the promontory called the Redhead, exhibit the
most unequivocal marks of decay from the same
cause; and on a very slight inspection, the conti-
nued progress of disintegration is deducible from
the appearance of the shores at Montrose, the
North Esk river, Johnshaven, Dunottar Castle,
and the bay of Stonehaven. From thence along
the shores of Aberdeen and Banffshire, with little
exception, the coast consists either of extensive
tracts of sand or of primitive rocks as granite,
porphyry and serpentine. The shifting nature of
the sands, which, when dry, have been blown in-
land, and have covered nearly the whole parish of
Furvie, belonging to the Earl of Errol, necessarily
prevents the effects of the sea from being so easily
traced as upon the softer kinds of rocks, or on al-
luvial grounds ; and although these rocky shores
do not yield so readily to the impulse of the waves,
yet even the granite itself cannot withstand the
continued force of the sea, which here rolls its
surges upon it, in north-easterly gales, with un-
interrupted violence, all the way from the coasts

Elgin.
Inverness
and
Cromarty.
of Lapland and Norway. We are not, therefore; so much surprised to find incisions made into the hardest rocks, exhibiting such extraordinary cavities as the Bullers of Buchan, and other striking appearances on this coast near Peterhead, as to observe its destructive effects upon the more sheltered shores of the Frith of Forth, formerly described, or those of the Moray Frith, which we are now approaching.
   After passing the river Spey, the rocks on the shores belong to the sandstone or coal formation, and here again the wasting effects of the sea become more apparent. At the ancient town of Burghhead, an old fort or establishment of the Danes was built upon a sandstone cliff, which, tradition says, had a very considerable tract of land beyond it; but it is now washed by the waves, and literally overhangs the sea. Between Burghhead and Fort George, a space of about twenty-five miles, the coast is one continued bank of sand, which has undergone very great changes from the blowing of extensive sand-banks, that has buried several hundred acres of the estate of Gubin, and covered many houses; nor have the ravages of the sea been less felt than those of the sand-flood in this quarter, as the old town of Find- horn was destroyed by the sea, and the site of it is now overflowed by every tide. At Fort George, the encroachments of the sea are likely to produce considerable damage upon the walls of tfye fort,

some of the projecting bastions, formerly at a dis-
tance from the sea, are now in danger of being
undermined by the water and it has been found
necessary to construct a kind of chevaux de frise,
to break the force of the waves before they reach
the walls. The same remarks regarding the de-
structive effects of the sea, are also applicable to
the shores of the Frith of Dornoch, and more shel-
tered Frith of Cromarty and the great basin above
tort George,- and even of Loch Beauly. The
coast of Caithness the islands of Orkney, and the
southern parts of Shetland, consist chiefly of sand-
stone rocks, and from their great exposure to the
sea, it is no wonder that they appear in many
places to be rapidly wasting. In Orkney it de-
serves particularly to be remarked, that the Start
Point of San day, which is now formed into an
island every flood-tide, was, even in the recollec-
tion of some old people still alive, one continuous
tract of firm ground ; but at present, the channel
between Sanday and the Start Island, as it is now
called, is hardly left by the water in neap tides 
and since a light-house was erected upon this
Point about ten years ago, the channel appears to
have worn down at least two feet. It wrnuld in-
deed be an endless task, to enter into minutiae re-
garding the waste observable upon the western
coast of Scotland, including the shires of Suther-
land, Ross and Inverness, although defended from
the heavier breach of the Atlantic Ocean, by the

Lexfis, Harris, &c.
Argyle.
Shores of G&lloway and the Clyde, &c.
 Chain of Islands, consisting of the Lewis, Harris
Uist and Barra, extending about 120 miles in a north-
eastern and south-western direction, and commonly
called the Long Island, while the Isle of Sky and the
Argyleshire coast are sheltered by the Western He-
brides, including the Great Islands of Mull, Jura,
and Isla ; yet even in the most sheltered places of
this coast, as we have seen of the Friths of Forth
and Moray, the sea in many places is rapidly
wasting the shores. These effects, however, are
not less obvious on those islands which are ex-
posed to the direct breach of the Great Western
Ocean, as, for example, on the western shores of the
the Lewis and Uist Islands. In Uist, particularly,
the sea has overrun considerable tracts of land,
forming every tide extensive pools and many ford-
able channels. The extensive low link grounds,
and all the sandy shores of these Western Islands,
and also of Orkney and Shetland, consist almost
wholly of broken or pounded shells, thrown up in
the first instance by the sea, and afterwards blown
by the winds upon the land. 
  All along the coast of Galloway, and shores of
the shires of Ayr, Renfrew, and Bute, the wasting
effects of the sea are no less remarkable. In Loch
Ryan, for example, the whole verge of the land
round the Loch is visibly wasting, and the margin
of the sea is extending outwards. At the town of
Stranraer, the houses along the shore had formerly
gardens, between them and high-water mark, but

of late years, the inhabitants have been under the necessity of erecting bulwarks, to secure the walls and approaches to their houses. At the village of Kirkcolm, a neck of land called Scar-Ridge, extended into the loch about half a mile, on which cattle used formerly to graze, which is now nearly washed away, and in high tides is laid wholly under water. Observations of a similar nature occur on various parts of the shores of the Frith of Clyde, where they strike the mind with more force than perhaps in any other part of the kingdom ; for here the shores are not only comparatively well sheltered, but the tides are so languid as to rise only from nine to eleven feet perpendicular, while the corresponding tides on the eastern coast of Great Britain, rise from fourteen to sixteen feet.
   Observations upon the wasting of the land by the encroachment of the sea, might, with great propriety, be made upon the shores of Ireland, of which I have seen many instances on the western, northern and eastern coasts, from Loch Swilly, in the county of Donegal, to the Tusker Rock, off the coast of Wexford. But, without enlarging upon these shores, we shall now turn our attention to the coast of England, which, with the opposite shores of Holland and France, form the apices of the German Ocean and British Channel. From the more soft and yielding matters of which these shores are formed, particularly those of England,

Northum
berland.
Durham*
which are at the same time exposed to the Violent attacks of the sea in storms from the north-eastern and south-western directions, the wasting effects of the sea are altogether so-very remarkable, that it may in general be affirmed that these shores are in a progressive state of decay. Beginning with the north-eastern coast, examples of this will suggest themselves to the recollection of those who are acquainted with the shores of Northumberland, Durham and Yorkshire, as at Holy Island, for example, and the shores near Bamborough Castle, where the sea has made considerable inroads upon the land. Tynemouth Castle, situated at the entrance of the river Tyne, which now, iri a manner, overhangs the sea, had formerly a considerable extent of land beyond it; Tynemouth Head being composed of a soft sandstone, is gradually worn away by the action of the sea and the effects of the weather, and every season it falls down in such quantities, that the degradation is quite observable to the inhabitants of the town of Tynemouth. Upon the southern side of the entrance to the river Tyne, many acres of land have been washed away from the extensive ebb called the Middens: the same thing has happened along the whole shores of the county of Durham, particularly between the rivers Tyne and Weir, where the coast is chiefly composed of a soft friable limestone ; and indeed the land is obviously in a state of waste all the way to the Tees. Here the an-

cient borough of Hartlepool presents a wonderful example of the encroachment of the sea: it is built upon a projecting point of land, which is fast approaching to the state of an island. Part of the borough lands are every season disappearing, and the tide now flows within the gates of the town. The wasting effects of the sea on the soft friable stone of the isthmus on which the town of Hartlepool stands, is altogether so strikingly remarkable, that it seems curious and highly interesting to the eye of a stranger. On the southern side of the great sand-banks forming the mouth of the Tees, we enter upon the coast of Yorkshire, which extends to the estuary of the Yorkshire River Humber, being upwards of a hundred miles.
This coast consists Chiefly of sandstone and chalk- hills, and in many places exposes a precipitous face to the sea, which is acting upon it, and in general producing its rapid destruction; of this, many examples are familiar to those on the spot, particularly in the neighbourhood of Whitby and Scarborough. For a few miles both on the northern and southern side of Flamborough-head Lighthouse, the section of the coast is almost perpendicular, and consists of chalk, intermixed with portions of clay. At the eastern extremity, or pitch of the head, the chalky cliff is about seventy feet in height : from this point the coast decline all the way to the Town of Bridlington, and from

Lincoln
and
Norfolk.
thence to Dimblington Cliff, near the entrance to the Humber, it is a low sandy shore.. From what has been already stated of the effects of the sea upon the hard or more compact shores of Scotland, it is easy to imagine what its operation must be on the line of coast just described. Accordingly, the inhabitants at Flamborough-head, and indeed all along the Yorkshire coast, are too often kept in mind of this, by the removal of their land-marks and inclosures ;  and there are many traditions of churches, houses, and whole fields having been overrun by the sea in the neighbourhood of Hornsea, Kilnsea, and the Spurn Point on the northern side of the Humber. The widely,ex- tended mouth of this estuary, and the manner in which it is cumbered with sand-banks, off the coast at Clea and Saltfleet in Lincolnshire, and indeed the appearance of the coast all the way to Boston, shews that much of the land has been swallowed up or overrun by the sea; of which there are many striking proofs, both of ancient and modern occurrence.
   The same remarks are also applicable to the great ebb, called the Wash, forming the entrance or navigation to the harbours of Boston and Lyne. Here, it would appear, that the sea has 'made a breach through the chalk hills, which are observable on each side of the Wash, in the counties of Lincoln and Norfolk, where it is obvious that the land has at one time extended further in-

to the sea, and is at present undergoing the process of actual waste. Perhaps evidence of this may also be drawn from the works of William of Malmesbury, who represents the whole of the Fens of Lincoln to have been in a state of high cultivation in the eleventh century. But certainly a most unequivocal proof of this is afforded from the discovery by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Joseph Correa, mentioned in the 89th volume of the Philosophical Transactions, of the remains of a submarine forest on this coast, now several fathoms under water, where the roots, boles and branches of trees, particularly of the birch, of large size, were observed : from the account of the fishermen of this coast, these appearances are to be seen for many miles along the shore, in the form of a range of small islets; and trees have been often found, the timber of which was so fresh, as to be fit for economical purposes. 'The inhabitants of the country likewise represent, that at one time the parish-church stood greatly within the present sea-mark, and that the walls of houses, of a former village, have been seen at low ebbs ; and they allege, that even the clock of the present parish-church, is the same that was in the church, the foundations of which are now overflowed. It seems therefore probable, and indeed it is of the greatest importance to the drainage of this tract of country to know, that the present state of the Fen Country arises from the encroachments of the

Suffolk and Essex.

sea, occasioned by the silting or filling up to a certain degree of the alveus or bed of the German Ocean, rather than from the gradual retreat, or subsiding of these waters ; and that the sea, notwithstanding some anomalous instances of recession, which shall afterwards be noticed, is invariably trenching upon the land. In exploring and comparing the present with the ancient state of our shores, we cannot enough, lament the inaccuracy of the older maps and charts of our coast; and every one must rejoice at the prospect this country has, of soon possessing maps founded on the “ Trigonometrical Survey of Great: Britain,” now in progress, under the direction of the Board of Ordnance. This great national work, will enable future generations with accuracy to appreciate and compare, the effects which we are now describing.
  Proceeding southward, we next traverse the coast of Suffolk and Essex, where numerous instances occur of ravages which the sea is making upon the shore: It has already been ascertained, that the sand-banks of Yarmouth Roads have, of late years, considerably altered, and that the depth of water is, upon the whole, lessened, a circumstance most severely felt by the mariners on this part of the coast, and indeed all the way to the Thames, the entrance of which is now so much encumbered with deposited matters, in the form of sand-banks, as to render that navigation

extremely difficult, irksome and hazardous. Some pretty, extensive additions have also been made to the land in this neighbourhood, at the junction of the rivers Aide and Butley, in the great gravelly beach which extends no less than about eight or ten miles in length, varying in breadth from a few hundred feet to about a mile ; and similar appearances are to be found on this coast, as at Harwich, near the confluence of the rivers Stour and Ipswich, where a considerable addition has been made to the land on the southern side of Landguardfort: yet these, and other examples of the same kind, are trifling, in proportion to the astonishing effects of the sea in destroying the laud in this very neighbourhood.
Near Leostoffe, Dunwich, and Aldborough Castle, on the Suffolk coast, the sea is daily making impressions upon the land, which is apparent to the observation of every one acquainted in the slightest degree with that coast, and is at some places severely felt by the proprietor, or even by the tenant during the short endurance of his leafce-hold.
At the Naze Tower, near Walton, and indeed all along the coast of Essex, the same appearances are no less obvious. Crossing the numerous sandbanks and shoals which greatly encumber the mouth of the River Thames to the Kentish coast, we are every where presented with instances of the degradation of the land by the encroachment of the sea. From Sheerness along the

British
Channel.
shore of the Isle of Sheppey, and from the entrance of the River Swale to Margate and Ramsgate, at various places, very large portions of the chalky cliffs are continually giving way to the sea. At Sheppey Island, Thanet and Sandwich, there are proofs of the land gaining somewhat upon the sea: of this, the Goodwin and other sandbanks may also be considered as examples; but these cases, arising from the shape of the coast, and the set of particular currents of the tide, are rather so many evidences of the silting up of the. alveus or bed of the ocean, and shall be afterwards alluded to as proofs of the consequent tendency of the sea to overflow its banks. But to continue, it may further be noticed, that the Streets of Deal are often laid under water, and houses there have occasionally been washed down by the sea; and, indeed, the wasting effects are very striking alb along this coast, and the opposite shores of France, the Netherlands, and Holland.
  At Romney Marshes, in the British Channel, labourers are constantly employed attending and repairing the fences and sea-dikes of these low shores. On the precipitous shores from Deal to Dover, Folkstone and Hithe, large portions of the chalk cliffs are frequently undermined and carried away ; particularly at the South Foreland and Cliffs of Dover, where I happened to witness the effects of the recent fall, some years ago, of an immense quantity of these extraordinary chalk

cliffs, the ruins of which appeared to cover several
acres of ground, and must have. contained many
thousands of tons. A fall of this kind, near
Beachyhead, on the Sussex coast, is noticed in a
paper by Mr Webster in the Transactions of the
Geological Society: the portion which gave way
extended 300 feet in length, and was 70 or 80
in breadth ; a clergyman who happened at the
moment to be walking on the spot, observing the
ground giving way, had just time to escape when
the whole fell with a dreadful crash. Shoreham
and Brighton also afford many examples of this
kind, particularly the latter, “ where a whole
street has within these few years fallen into the
sea.” In the same manner, the opposite coast of
France is understood to be acted upon ; and the
numerous Islands lying off that coast and the
coasts of Germany and Holland. I might also
extend these observations to the shores of Hamp-
shire, Dorset, Devon, Cornwall, particularly to
the Isles of Wight and Portland, and the Scilly
Islands; the wasting of the land, and the en-
croachment of the sea, being every where remark-
able, and always in proportion to the nature of the
strata or rocks composing the coast, whether allu-
vial, chalk, limestone, sandstone or granite.
   Nor are these effects of the sea confined to the
shores of the German Ocean and British, Chan-
nel ; for the wasting of the land is no less remark-
able in St George’s Channel and the Irish Sea, in

          eluding the coast of Ireland on the one side, and on the other, the shores of Wales, Lancashire, Westmoreland, and the counties of Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, &c. where neither the rocky coasts, and exposed situations of the Islands of Anglesea, Man, Copland, Craig of Ailsa, and the Islands of Cumbrae, nor the sheltered and alluvial shores of the Bristol Channel, are exempted. A striking example of this has been obligingly communicated to me by CHARLES STOKES, Esq. Secretary of the Geological Society, which occurs off Swansey, where the receding tide exposes a large deposite of trees, within 60 yards from high-water mark. North The encroachment of the sea upon the Welch coast, is briefly noticed by ARTHUR AIK IN, Esq. in his interesting Journal and Mineralogical Tour through North Wales, p. 229. &c. in which he enumerates several examples of this along the broken and irregular shores between the Severn andDubHn and the Mersey. Even the granitic coast at Dublin Bay, and indentations of the sandstone shores at Liverpool and Lancaster, and the more extensive Frith of the Solway, are also subject to the unvarying destructive effects of the sea upon the land.
     Were proofs of the generality of the wasting effects of the sea upon the land to be taken from foreign countries, we should find them no less striking. Whether we look to those coasts and islands which are washed by the expanse of the

Atlantic Ocean, or consider the more sheltered shores, as those of the Adriatic, we shall find an almost invariable tendency to the enlargement of the margin or boundary of the sea.
   Observations to this effect have been obligingly communicated to me by a gentleman resident at the island of Granada, who is also well acquainted with Barbadoes, and all the West India islands to sea-ward, commonly called Leeward Islands.
On several of these he states, that the sea is making a visible impression, and particularly mentions, that, of late, one side of a street in the town of Granville, in the island of Granada, has been Granada, washed away by the sea.
   A gentleman who visited the city of Venice and the shores of the Adriatic in the summer of 1816, writes me, that the Venetians believe, and confidently assert, that their ancient city, founded about 1400 years since, must by this time have been almost entirely washed away and laid in ruins by the increasing advancement of the sea, had it not been protected and defended by a great mole or sea-wall and embankment, which became necessary and has now been erected about eighty years. Any particular description of this mole is perhaps abstractly more a matter of interest to the engineer than to the geologist; but from the magnitude of the work, and the direct purpose to which it is applied, it is presumed, that, even here, its general outline may be given, as affording some additional interest to the

subject. This great work is situate about fifteen miles southward from the city of Venice, is built across part of the apex of the Adriatic Sea, and is almost three miles in extent. In part of its course, it is carried through a morass, from LTsle de Chiusa on the west, along L’Isle de Murasse to the Bocca di Porto on the east. The depth of the foundations of this stupendous work varies according to the nature of the bottotn, and the depth of the water, which at some places is said said to be sufficient to float a frigate quite close to the wall. The masonry terminates in a wall of about ten feet in height, with a walk of four feet in breadth, forming its thickness at the top, from which this immense wall and embankment is seen to slope and fall majestically into the Adriatic. This proud monument of Venetian greatness, which interrupts the natural current of the water, is the scene of great contest, in stormy weather, between the fury of the waves and the obstinate gravity of the ponderous materials of which the greater part of it is composed, and which are also firmly cemented together with Puzzolano-mortar. The sloping face of the wall in some places extends fifty feet in breadth to the water’s edge of solid masonry, beyond which is an irregular stratum or heap of mound stones, consisting of large loose blocks, which are notwithstanding at times set in motion, and the smaller pieces thrown over the wall by the waves,	

    Without further examples, however, we may for the present venture to assume, that the disim tegrating and wearing effects of the waters of the ocean are general. Whether we contemplate them upon the land by the immediate and powerful impulse of the waves at the base of a rocky shore, or, with the elegant and profound illustrator of the Huttonian Theory, trace it in the form of rain, rills and torrents, in the higher regions, we shall find its effects all tending to one unvarying principle, producing the degradation of the land, and consequent tendency to filling up at the bottom of the sea ; while, at the same time, from the, magnitude and extent of the surface, and other occult causes, we are not aware of the elevation of its level in any sensible degree. Nature seems to have created a kind of compensating power to counterbalance the seeming conflict of the elements of Earth and Water : for while the ocean appears to be extending its surface, it seems also probable that the quantity of its waters are upon the whole lessened, and that part of them undergoes a complete and permanent change of form after the process of evaporation; and that the earthy particles continually accumulating at the bottom of the sea, have a direct tendency not only to preserve a uniform level, but even in some instances to make the water overrun what we have been accustomed to consider its boundary. If we attentively inquire into the generality of the wasting effects of the sea upon the margin of the land, 

it will perhaps appear, that the instances in which the sea can be considered as just taking a portion of land from one part, while it adds in like proportion to another part of the coast, will come far short of the instances of detrition in all quarters of the globe.
   Having now pointed out, from actual observation on about one-half of the coast of Ireland, and on all parts of the shores of Great Britain, from the Scilly Islands to Unst, or northmost of the Shetland Islands, That the land, on the margin of the sheltered bays and friths as well as on the most exposed promontories and open shores, is undergoing the process of waste and decay from the impulse and action of the sea ; I shall in a future paper, with the indulgence of the Society, endeavour to shew that the Cause of this effect, particularly on the shores of the German Ocean and British Channel, is, in a good measure, owing to the immense quantity of debris which must be accumulating, at least ta a certain depth, in the bottom of the ocean.


