THROUGH the kindness of Mr. Heuland I have lately received a collection of fossil woods from Germany, that gentleman having very obligingly engaged one of his correspondents to attend to the particular inquiries I wished to make, and to collect for me the objects described.
  To this collection was added a specimen of recent wood in which some portions have become petrified by carbonate of lime; and although this is not the first known instance of the occurrence of wood partly petrified by calcareous spar, yet it has, from its peculiarity, led to comparisons with some other fossil woods of remarkable appearance, both calcareous and siliceous, and for which it appears to have afforded some explanation. I am induced to submit to the Geological Society the following observations respecting it, in the hope, that by exciting attention and remark from other observers, we may obtain some knowledge on the very difficult question of the process of petrification.
  This piece of wood is of the common beech (Fagus sylvatica), and was found by M. Cotta of Tharand in an ancient Roman aqueduct at Eilsen in the principality of Lippe Buckeberg, but I understand that he has not published any account of it.
  The size of the portion in my possession, is about 3^ inches by 4^, and the thickness is nearly one inch. For the better understanding of the description, the accompanying drawing has been made of the specimen (Plate XVI. fig. 1).
  The wood is, for the most part, in the state of very old dry wood, but there are several insulated portions, in which the place of the wood has been taken by carbonate of lime. These portions, as seen on the surface of the horizontal section, are irregularly circular, varying in size, but are generally a little less or more than -£ of an inch in diameter, and they run through the whole thickness of the specimen in separate, perpendicular columns.
  The vessels of the wood are distinctly visible in the carbonate of lime, and are more perfect in their form and size, in those parts of the specimen, than in that which remains unchanged; as if the petrification of those portions had taken place, while the wood was yet in sound condition, and the remaining part had since contracted around them, as it gradually decayed. This is shown by the bending of the medullary rays, adjoining the limits of the calcareous portions.
   Dr. Turner has examined one of these portions, and finds it to contain 9 per cent, of ligneous fibre, the rest being carbonate of lime.
   I have not obtained an account of the situation of the wood in the aqueduct, or of any circumstance to explain how it had become exposed to the action of water containing carbonate of lime in solution, but I am unwilling to delay the communication to the Geological Society, of the remarks it has suggested to me.
   Mr. Robert Brown, to whom I had the pleasure of showing this specimen on the day I received it, immediately reminded me, of one of silicified wood from Antigua in my own collection, which we had formerly examined together, and in which the polished horizontal section exhibits a similar appearance of insulated portions, that have the structure preserved in a more perfect state than the rest of the specimen, as is represented in the accompanying drawing. (PI. XVII).
   The whole specimen is completely silicified, and takes an excellent polish. The portions best preserved are irregularly circular in form, about of an inch or rather more in diameter, and in them the vessels and medullary rays are distinctly seen in good condition, while in all the other parts (although the general form of the stem is preserved) the vessels are compressed (particularly round the more perfect portions) and the medullary rays are bent and comparatively indistinct.
   From the different condition in which the different parts of the wood have been preserved, it appears, that die process of petrification had first taken place simultaneously at a number of separate points,and then had stopped,and that the unchanged part had subsequently in somedegree decayed.
   If at this period a transverse section of the wood had been made, its condition must have been similar to that of the wood from the Roman aqueduct, having some parts petrified while the greater portion was still in the state of wood, though not in a sound state. After this, the progress of petrifaction was again renewed, and the partially decayed remainder of the wood has been silicified.
   Another instance (which is of calcareous petrification) appears also to have an analogy to the above-mentioned. This is the specimen from Allen Bank in Berwickshire, described and figured by Mr- Witham (On the Structure of Fossil Vegetables, PI. VIII. fig. 7), under the name of Anabathra pulcherrima.
   The texture of this plant, whatever it may have been, was much more lax than that of the woods before spoken of. The horizontal section shows some instances, in which the structure is preserved from the centre to the circumference, but more frequently only insulated portions of about one tenth of an inch in diameter, in which also the structure is well preserved. The direction of the rays, which passthrough these portions, shows that they are, with scarcely any exception, in the same position as when the stem was entire, although they are now surrounded by mineral matter (carbonate of lime), in which scarcely a trace of the structure of the plant remains.
   From this condition of the fossil, it appears, that as in the former instances, the progress of petrifaction commenced at a number of separate points and was afterwards interrupted, but in the present case, the whole of the remaining portion of the wood appears to have been entirely destroyed by decay, which occurred after the interruption, and no renewal of the process took place, while any of the other parts of the wood existed.
  The fossil wood from Lionel Braes, described and figured by the same author (PI. 3.), is also a case where parts only of the wood have been petrified and the remainder entirely decomposed by subsequent decay, but the petrified parts are in their places, and the intervening space is filled up by crystallized carbonate of lime.
  Such are the appearances shown by sections made in a transverse direction, or at right angles to the axis of the growth of the wood. In the examination by means of longitudinal sections, we shall find the following differences between them.
  In the recent wood from the Roman aqueduct, the carbonate of lime runs, as I have stated, through the whole thickness of the specimen, the petrified portions appearing to be in long columns. In the Antigua specimen, the well preserved portions are not, in any of the instances I have seen, more than three eighths of an inch in the longitudinal section, and their form is irregular.
  In the Allen Bank fossil, the insulated petrified portions are of the same size in the longitudinal as in the transverse sections, showing that they are of spherical form.
   In the last named instances it appears to me, that we must conclude, that the whole of the wood was penetrated by a saturated solution of the mineral matter, and that the solution was in the state at which crystallization was about to commence. In solutions in such a state, we know that crystallization frequently begins simultaneously at a number of separate points, round which the crystalline matter continues to aggregate. In the Allen Bank fossil, at the external part of the section, this has evidently taken place, as an examination with a magnifying glass shows, that although the structure of the wood is preserved undisturbed, yet that the petrifaction is there made up by the contact of a number of small spheres. The progress of petrifaction, however, appears to have stopped before it had mineralized the whole of these specimens, and this may have been caused by an accession of water diluting the solution, below the point at which crystallization would go on. The variation in the quantity of rain falling at different periods, or in different seasons, might occasion such a result. After this, as I have before remarked, the unchanged portion of the wood was subject to decay. In the case of the Antigua specimen, before the process of petrifaction was renewed, the wood had in some degree decayed and contracted; but in the Allen Bank fossil it had entirely decomposed and disappeared, leaving scarcely a trace of structure in the remaining parts. These are filled up with calcareous spar, which has crystallized from a number of separate points, and continued till the whole mass was united.
  I must here advert to what I have mentioned, respecting the position of the insulated petrified portions of the Allen Bank fossil, in which the structure shows, that they are scarcely at all removed from the position in which they grew. As these seem to have remained in their places, after the other portions of the wood had decayed and disappeared, and before the intermediate parts had been filled up by solid mineral matter, it appears to follow that they must have been suspended in the fluid solution which has since crystallized around them,-^a condition which it is certainly difficult to comprehend.
  In regard to the piece of wood from the aqueduct, the petrified portions are also separate and insulated, but as they are in long continuous columns, it is probable that the whole of the wood was not equally penetrated with the calcareous solution.
  The other cases I have met with, of a partial petrifaction by carbonate of lime, are those of the hazel nuts at Belfast Lough, mentioned by Dr. Mac- donnel, in 1810*, and of partly petrified wood and nuts, described by Mr. Phillips, from the vale of the Aire, near Ferry Bridge, in Yorkshiref. In this latter case, it appears that the wood and nuts are in a deposit of alluvium. Many pieces of the wood, and the kernels of some of the nuts, found at a depth of 12 feet, are partially petrified.
  A specimen of the wood here mentioned, which was given by Mr. Phillips to Dr. Buckland, who has allowed me to examine it, is a portion of a stem or branch, split longitudinally, about four inches in length, and about two and a half in diameter. In this, a part near the centre, is now completely petrified by carbonate of lime. This portion is about half an inch in diameter at one end, and extends longitudinally through the wood to the length of about three inches, and terminates in a point. It is in its natural position, and the medullary rays are continuous through the calcareous part and the unchanged portion, as shown in the accompanying wood-cut.
  The line of separation between the calcareous part and the unchanged wood, is perfectly well defined, and although we may suppose that the vessels of the wood, have acted as conductors to the solution, and given it a direction longitudinally through the stem, yet it is difficult to understand why the petrifaction has been confined to a single spot or column.
   Partially petrified mood from the Vale of the Aire, near Ferrybridge, Yorkshire.
   It is indeed evident that the vessels of the wood have thus acted as conductors to the solution, from the sinuosities in the outline of the petrified portion which follow the irregular direction of the fibres, where they have by knots or other interruptions been forced from a straight line. The calcareous material was probably derived from the neighbouring limestone beds, and might be supposed to diffuse itself through the alluvium; but in the case of the aqueduct, we cannot imagine that there was so large or so generally diffused a supply of mineral matter. I should mention also, that the examination of thin slices with a microscope shows, that the structure is rather better preserved in the wood at Ferrybridge, than in that from the aqueduct.
  Mr. Brown has also shown me specimens, in his possession, of petrified wood, in which the greater portion is silicified, but there are some parts still in a soft state, and not at all penetrated by the silex. Some of these are from Lough Neagh, and others from Bonn.
  Although the amount of information obtained by the preceding observations is but small, yet, in establishing the facts, that petrifaction sometimes commences at a number of separate points, and that it is liable to be interrupted and again renewed after an interval of time, we have an explanation of the circumstances which have been difficult to understand, in regard to many specimens of fossil wood, in which parts of the ligneous structure are preserved in good condition, while other parts appear to be more or less decayed.
  The same facts appear to occur both in siliceous and calcareous petrifactions ; but nothing that I have met with, is calculated to throw any light upon the question, of the means by which the solution of siliceous matter has been accomplished.
  A short description of the different conditions in which fossil wood appears in different specimens may be worthy of attention.
  Sometimes the most minute parts of the structure have been preserved, as is shown under the microscope in the markings of the vessels of Palms, and the well known instances of the circular discs peculiar to the vessels of coniferous wood, which are as distinct in the fossil as in the recent wood. From this high state of perfection, we have every degree of condition, down to the very last stages of decay ; hence it appears, that there is not anything in the state or condition of the wood, which has influence upon the process.
   Sometimes we find petrifactions of the most close grained, and probably the hardest kinds of wood, in good condition; at other times, we meet with stems of a soft and succulent character, and there are also instances of the complete silicification of the young leaves of a palm tree, when just about to shoot forth, and in that state which, in the West Indies, is called the cabbage of the palm.
   The different states in which the stems of palm trees have been preserved, are also deserving of notice. These consist of a cellular tissue, among which are separate fascicles of ligneous vessels, which rise through the stem. In some few cases, the cellular tissue is well preserved, while scarcely any of the vessels or woody fibres remain, and the spaces they occupied, are now hollow passages through the specimen. In other cases, the cellular tissue has disappeared, and the bundles of vessels alone are well preserved. Other cases occur, in which both the cellular tissue and the vessels, are preserved in good condition. On these facts, I would remark, first, that where the cellular tissue has been petrified, and the vessels have disappeared, the process must have taken place, soon after the wood had been exposed to the action of moisture, because the cellular part would soon decay; and that it was then suspended, as in the cases described in the beginning of this paper. Secondly, where the woody vessels alone have been preserved, 1 conclude, that a time elapsed before the process of petrifaction commenced, during which the cellular tissue had decayed. Thirdly, that where both structures are preserved, the process had commenced at an early period, and continued without interruption till it was completed throughout.
   There are also some cases, in which hollow dicotyledonous trees have been petrified, and in these cases the middle part is filled up with chalcedony and agates, sometimes leaving cavities which are coated with crystals of quartz. I have also seen cases, in which the cellular tissue only of the stems of palms has been preserved, and the structure of woody vessels had disappeared, but the places where they had been, have been filled up (doubtless subsequently) with agates.
   In conclusion, I have only to state my regret, that the information 1 have to offer is so scanty, and to express the hope that this subject may be taken up by others, who have better opportunities, and more knowledge and talent for conducting the inquiry.

SINCE I communicated to the Geological Society, the preceding notice on the partly petrified wood from the ancient Roman aqueduct at Eilsen, in the principality of Lippe Buckeberg, Mr. Robert Brown has shown to me a specimen from the same piece of wood, which was presented to him at Tharand, in the month of October last, by M. Cotta of that place, who discovered the wood in the aqueduct, and remarked its peculiar condition. Mr. Brown has pointed out to me in the longitudinal section, that the petrified portions, in his specimen, are about two inches in length, and in the middle part, nearly a quarter of an inch in diameter, and terminate in a point at each end. The petrified portions are, in these instances, completely inclosed within and surrounded by the unchanged wood. See PI. 16, fig. 3.
   Mr. Brown has observed another remarkable circumstance in the condition of these petrified portions. The change of the longitudinal fibres appears to be complete, but the medullary rays, of which the ends are seen in this section, are still in their ligneous state, as shown in the magnified engraving, PI. 16, fig. 4.
   From this it appears, that the petrifying process had not been so fully completed, as in the portion of the same wood, which first came into my possession ; but on referring to that specimen, I have found some instances, in which a part of the medullary ray, that passes through the petrified portion, has not been so completely changed as the surrounding longitudinal fibres, or the part of the same ray, which is more in the centre of the petrified portion.
   Of the rest of this specimen, some part is much decayed and worm-eaten, while another part is hard and in good condition; and the line of separation between them, is, in some places, remarkably well defined.
   Although the latter does not to the eye, present any appearance but that of sound wood, I was induced to examine it, and had the pleasure of finding, that, what may perhaps be considered as the first stage of petrifaction, has taken place in it.
   I cut in a transverse direction as thin a piece as I could detach with a sharp knife, and placed it in water under the microscope, then adding with the point of a quill a drop of muriatic acid, I immediately perceived the disengagement of gas, which seemed to proceed chiefly from the inside of the larger vessels, as if an extremely thin coating of carbonate of lime had been deposited within them. In the more decayed part, there is also a slight action produced by the acid, but not so strong as in the sounder part.
  From Dr. Buckland, I have received some specimens of fossil wood from Allesley, near Coventry, respecting which he has sent a communication to the Society*, and at his request, the Rev. W. Bree has also sent to me specimens from the same locality. Among these, which as far as I have been able to ascertain, are all coniferous woods, are several in which some portions are in a much better state of preservation than the rest of the specimens, although the whole is now silicified. These cases are analogous to that from Antigua, described in my former notice on this subject; but in that instance, the longi- tudinaltsection showed, that these better preserved portions were not more than three-eighths of an inch in length, and these were the longest I had then observed. In some of the Allesley specimens, these portions are full an inch in length, and terminate in a fine point at each end, in the same remarkable manner as I have above described to be the case, in the portion of the piece of wood from the Roman aqueduct belonging to Mr. Brown. In others, the best preserved portions are long narrow columns, going through the whole length of specimens, three inches long.
  I have not much to offer in the way of remark, in addition to the simple description of facts above stated. The instances in which some parts of specimens of petrified wood, have the structure better preserved than the rest, are not uncommon ; but in the detection of the commencement of a mineral deposition in the vessels of the wood, and in Mr. Brown’s remark of the medullary rays remaining unchanged, while surrounded by the petrified longitudinal fibres, we have, I believe, the first ocular demonstration of progressive steps in the process of petrifaction.
  Since the above was written, Mr. Arthur Aikin has obligingly communicated to me the following particulars of a piece of wood containing small particles of metallic copper.

