SINCE the publication of Dr. Bigsby’s paper on the geography and geology of Lake Huron, in the first volume of the 2nd series of this Society’s Transactions, in which some Orthocerata of peculiar forms are described, I have seen and examined many specimens of that tribe of fossils from the same place and from different parts of North America, as well as from other localities.
  Many of the American specimens of which I am about to speak derive additional interest from the circumstances under which they were collected during the expeditions of discovery by Sir John Franklin, Sir Edward Parry, Dr. Richardson, the late Capt. Lyon and Capt. Back, and by Capt. Bayfield, during his survey of the Lakes and the river St. Lawrence. The correspondence in character of some of these Orthocerata with those of Lake Huron has been slightly alluded to in the appendices to Sir John Franklin’s second journey and the Journal of Capt. Back, but I have thought it desirable to lay before the Society a more detailed account of them, with figures of some of the different species.
  It will be observed, that these American localities are widely separated from each other, and are not parts of a continuous deposit; but the agreement in character of the limestone rock and of the fossils shows that they are of the same geological age.
  For general remarks on the geology of these rocks, I beg to refer to the appendices to the naratives of the expeditions above-mentioned. The object of the present communication is to describe some species which indicate generic separations among the Orthocerata, and to call attention to some considerations respecting the relations of the shells to the animals to which they belonged.
  In the species of Orthoceras found at Thessalon Island, the peculiarity consists in the structure of the siphuncle, which had, I believe, never been noticed till it was described in Dr. Bigsby’s paper.
  The siphuncle is large in proportion to the shell, and has a tube which runs through its whole length, setting off radii in verticillations from the outside of the tube to the inner wall of the siphuncle. These verticillations correspond in number to the chambers of the shell.
  The late Capt. Lyon collected at Igloolik, where the expedition under Sir Edward Parry passed the winter of 1822-23, some Orthocerata which present a similar large-sized siphuncle and a small internal tube, but no traces of the radii connecting the tube with the walls of the siphuncle can be seen. In these, however, the condition of the specimens, in which the siphuncle is filled with crystals of carbonate of lime, prevents a positive conclusion that the radii did not exist. Similar ones were found by Capt. Nias at Ooglit.
  Among the specimens brought by Dr. Richardson from Lake Winipeg were some fragments of Orthocerata which exhibited atube within a similarly large siphuncle, but the specimens were not sufficiently perfect for description, and additional information was the more requisite because this inner tube was surrounded by numerous radiating plates which filled up the remainder of the siphuncle. Other specimens of different sizes so much resembled the siphuncles of the preceding, that it was not possible to doubt their identity of character, although no traces of septa were visible; and at the same time they presented so much agreement in structure with the fossils found at Drummond Island in Lake Huron, which 1 described in Dr. Bigsby’s paper as corals, under the name of Huronirn, as to lead to a belief that the latter also were siphuncles of Orthocerata which had been entirely separated from the septa and external shell. To clear up, if possible, a point so interesting to those who study fossils was most desirable, and when Capt. Back was about to undertake the expedition in search of Capt. Ross’s party in 1832, Dr. Richardson furnished him with a memorandum of the particular locality of Lake Winipeg, in which the fossils were found, with a request that he would seek for better specimens.
  Capt. Back succeeded in obtaining some which have added much to our knowledge of the subject, and with further evidence which will be presently noticed, 1 think that the connexion of all these bodies with the family of Orthocerata is established.
  In the month of March last, Capt. Dawson, R.E., called my attention to a large specimen of an Orthoceras found at Castle Espie, in the county of Down, in Ireland, by Mr. Frederick W. Simms. On examination, I found in it the same peculiarities of the tube within the siphuncle, and radii from the tube, as in the species of Thessalon Island; and this is the first instance of this plan of organization I have met with in an Irish or English specimen.
  As all these specimens agree in the peculiarity of the siphuncle possessing an interior tube., and as this tube had doubtless an important function, I am disposed to include them all in one genus ; and that I may not multiply names without necessity, I will adopt the generic name of Actinoceras, given to the species from Thessalon Island by Bronn in the Lethsea Geognostica, where he copies the figure from the Geological Society’s Transactions, which figure appears to be his only authority for establishing the genus.
  It is true that the radii surrounding the tube within the siphon are not at all detected in some of the species, and that the radiating lamellae of others present a very different appearance from the separate radii of the species from Thessalon Island, but the important peculiarity of a tube within the siphon induces me to include them in one genus, as a subdivision of the family of the Orthocerata. More accurate knowledge may be acquired and the arrangement now proposed may be improved, but in the mean time it will, I think, be advantageous to adopt this character as a basis for making one group of these interesting fossils. The name is not characteristic of all the species thus brought together, but at present I had rather retain one that has been published than introduce a new one.
  The character of the genus Actinoceras is a large siphuncle, much dilated in each chamber and contracted at the parts where the septa are attached to it. Within the siphuncle a continuous tube, which appears to have been capable of expansion or contraction, and (sometimes at least) furnished with radii in verticillations which connect the tube within the walls of the siphuncle.
  The specimens I am yet acquainted with, appear to resolve themselves into the following species :—
1. Actinoceras Lyonii. (PI. LIX., fig. 1.)
  In this species a small tube is seen within the siphuncle, but no radii have been traced from it. The exterior has not been seen, and the specimens are not sufficiently perfect to lead to a decided opinion on this point. The shell is conical, tapering gradually. Found at Igloolik and Ooglit, in a yellowish-white limestone.
2. Actinoceras Bigsbii. (Geol. Trans., vol. i. N.S., PI. XXV.)
  The tube larger than in the preceding, and the radii in distinct verticillations. Found at Thessalon Island, Lake Huron. It may be doubted whether all the specimens belong to one species.
  However desirable it may be to give names to fossils in order to facilitate references, I think the attempt to establish and name genera from no other materials than figures published by other persons, is likely to lead to much evil. In the present instance Herr Bronn concludes his generic description with the words, that it requires further confirmation.
  In those figured in the Geological Transactions, vol.i., 2nd series, PI. XXV., it will be seen that the general form of the shell diminishes more rapidly in size, and that the siphuncle is perhaps nearer to the side in fig. 3 than in fig. 1. In all these specimens the septa are not preserved, but there is a vacant space between each chamber, although the substance of the walls of the siphuncle are distinctly seen. The substance of these septa must have been of considerable thickness, and on breaking a specimen for the purpose of examination, I found that a layer of shell belonging to the septa was visible on the cast of each of the chambers they had divided. From this it appears that the septa are composed of several layers.
3. Actinoceras Richardsoni. (PI. LIX., fig. 2, 3.)
  In this the tube is small; it is surrounded by numerous laminae or plates, filling up the siphuncle ; but it is difficult to determine their nature.
  The external shell is slightly conical in form. From Lake Winipeg, in yellowish-white limestone much resembling that from Igloolik.
4. Actinoceras Simmsii. (PI. LIX., fig. 4.)
  Shell large, conical, the upper chamber very deep. The tube within the siphuncle smaller than in A. Bigsbii.
  The number of the radii is not yet ascertained, but appears to be much less than in A. Bigsbii. This is a very large species found by Mr. Frederick William Simms, in a lime-quarry at Castle Espie, in the county of Down, in Ireland. It is two feet long, though imperfect, and contains the siphuncle only in the lower portion of the specimen, being broken away in the other part. The septa are composed of several laminae, and are of considerable thickness, showing a structure similar to that described by Mr. Miller in the chambered part of the Belenmite, but which he considered peculiar to that genus and not to exist in Orthocerataf.
  Of specimens belonging to other divisions of the Orthoceratidae, one from Drummond Island, presented to me by Capt. Bayfield, R.N., is a most beautiful and instructive example of the separation of a siliceous fossil from its surrounding rock by the long-continued action of weather.
  It exhibits an entirely new arrangement of the siphuncle, which could not be shown in the external view of this part, but which is well laid open in this fractured specimen.
  The structure thus seen has led to the explanation of peculiarities in the siphuncle of several specimens which were previously unintelligible, and hence to the establishment of another genus in the family, founded, as in the preceding case, upon the structure of this part of the shell.
  I have noticed this circumstance here because it is very remarkable in this specimen, although I believe that the upper is always deep in Orthocerata when perfect. In this instance it is however deeper than in any other I have seen. This figure is one-third of the natural size.
  This specimen is remarkable for having the external surface of the shell covered to a considerable thickness with a small species of coral, whicli must have continued for a long time to grow upon the shell, evidently after the death of the animal. This will be referred to in a subsequent part of his communication, p. 710.

  The interior of the siphuncle in these specimens is not continuous, but is divided into separate portions, corresponding in number with the chambers. The exterior shell of the siphuncle is extremely thin, and is generally broken away where it has been exposed to the weather; and the interior portions of the siphuncle are seen. A deep indentation in the middle of each of these portions corresponds with each septum of the shell, so that of each of these interior portions of the siphuncle one half is placed in one chamber and the other half in the chamber below it. A longitudinal section of it exhibits a very curious arrangement: the opening or interior passage of the siphuncle is comparatively small, and the inner and outer lines of each portion shown by the section are beautifully curved, as shown in PI. LX., fig. 1. The space between the inner and outer walls of these portions is considerable, and there is no trace of its having been filled by any substance.
  Induced by the information afforded by this specimen, I made sections of others in which I have detected the same construction, and by this means arrived at the knowledge of the external thin shell which originally covered the siphuncle. The siphuncle thus formed, has some resemblance to a row of beads, and hence the name of Ormoceras has been chosen for a group or genus to include them.
  As yet I can attempt to distinguish only three species, all of which are from the same locality, Drummond Island in Lake Huron   Named after M. White, Esq., of the Army Medical Staff, who was stationed on Drummond Island, and collected this and many other specimens of these interesting fossils.
  In speaking of Actinoceras Richardsoni, from Lake Winipeg, I pointed out the resemblance of its siphuncle to the Huroniae, which I formerly considered to be corals, and described as such in Dr. Bigsby’s paper. I was led to that opinion by the radiating plates, for which I knew of no analogy except in similarly radiating lamellae of the madreporic corals. I did not at that time understand the peculiar structure of the centre of these corals, in which I have since observed, that the hard parts are peculiarly contorted, generally in a spiral manner, for the purpose of giving a stronger attachment to the base of the animal’s stomach, as is described in the Zoological Journal, vol. iii. p. 486.
  The centre of the Huroniae is different from this, as in a longitudinal section an opening or tube is seen to pass continuously through the whole length.
  Other specimens, which could not be separated in character from the si- phuncle of the Actinoceras Richardsoni from Lake Winipeg, but on which no traces of septa, or external shell, could be perceived, had, as before observed, so much resemblance to the Huroniae, as to lead to the conclusion that the latter also were siphuncles of Orthocerata; but if so, we have to account for the constant disappearance, in the Huroniae, of all traces of the septa and of the external shell.
  This extraordinary fact seems to be intelligible only on the supposition that these parts were extremely thin, or composed of a substance not sufficiently strong to be permanent after the death of the animal. A strong corroboration of this suggestion is furnished by a specimen from Drummond Island, given to me by my friend Captain Portlock, R. E., President of the Geological Society of Dublin. A very careful drawing of this specimen is given in PI. LX., fig. 5. The lines on this specimen, it cannot, I think, be doubted, indicate the septa and external shell of an Orthoceras, while enough of the siphuncle is seen to establish its connexion with the Huroniae. These lines show that the substance of the external shell and of the septa must have been so thin that it is not a matter of surprise that they have been very rarely preserved.
  To this specimen I have given the name of Huronia Portlockii, as 1 do not at present propose to alter the name of the genus.
  To add to the evidence on this subject, I caused longitudinal sections to be made of some specimens of Huroniae, two of which are represented in PI. LX., fig. 2 and 3. They are of different forms, approaching to the H. vertebralis and H. spheroidalis of Dr. Bigsby’s paper before quoted. These fossils are not in the most favourable state of preservation for giving clear evidence of their original structure: the calcedony and quartz, which has crystallized upon it, tend much to make it obscure. Notwithstanding this, there is to be traced a great resemblance to the structure of the interior of the siphuncle of the Or- moceras; in each of them may be observed parts so greatly resembling the beautifully curved portions figured in 0. Bagfieldii, and so constantly to be traced in each enlarged portion of the fossil, that it seems evident that they indicate the original structure.

  If, then., these Huroniae are to be considered as the siphuncles of Orthocerata, (and such is the conclusion I have adopted from the evidence just stated,) and the septa and external shell were so thin and slight, in comparison to the strength and substance of the siphuncle, it becomes an object of interest to consider what was the condition of the shell in regard to the animal in its living state.
  It was, I believe, first suggested by the late Mr. Miller, “that all chambered shells were inclosed in, or capable of being covered and encompassed by, the animal; for without such a contrivance, that nice degree of buoyancy which they are intended to furnish to the animal, would be destroyed by the adhesion of parasitic testacea.”
  Although we cannot positively pronounce that such was the fact, the peculiar thinness of the septa and external shell, described in the specimen of Huronia Portlockii just mentioned, appear to me to require that they should be inclosed and protected. If the animals were contained in the upper chamber only, the lower ones would be exposed to a great extent in length; and from the size of some of the specimens of Huroniae, we must suppose the animal to have been of considerable weight; and a corresponding strength would be required for the preservation of the shell from destruction if it were external.
  It is true that in Carinaria and Argonauta we have examples of very thin external shells, and in the latter genus, some are of considerable size; but in these instances the animal fills the whole shell; consequently it is not exposed to the same degree of danger of injury as would be a long external appendage to an Orthoceras. In Nautilus the animal inhabits its last chamber only; and the shell of the earlier chambers is exposed ; but the shell is of considerable strength, and, being convoluted, every part of its surface is within reach of the soft parts of the animal, which would protect it from the adhesion of parasites.
  Whether all the straight-chambered shells were inclosed or not, and what evidence can be obtained upon the subject, is consequently an object of inquiry; and in this point of view 1 have paid attention to the Baculite. The external shell of these fossils is very rarely preserved; but I have met with some specimens which show that it must have been so thin that it could afford to the lower chambers little or no protection from external violence ; and it is difficult to imagine that shells of this form and size would be free from danger if external and thin in substance.
Wherever I have seen the last chamber of Orthocerata well preserved, I have found that it is of considerable length, and that it gradually diminishes in thickness to the upper termination, where it is so thin that it probably was never exposed. 
  When speaking of Actinoceras Simmsii, I have mentioned that a beautiful coral with small cells, resembling the Pavosites, covers it, and which shows the growth of a long period; there being many concentric layers accumulated on the shell. This is the only instance I know of the occurrence of coral or shell attached to an Orthoceras; and the rarity of such cases may fairly be stated as a further argument to prove that the Orthocerata were protected from the adhesion of parasites. In this instance, indeed, there is evidence of the growth of the coral being subsequent to the death of the shell; for a portion of the coral is covered with earthy deposit, over which other layers of the coral have afterwards grown, as shown in the section, PI. L1X., fig. 5.
  It has long been my wish to attempt a general revision of the Orthoceratidae, with the view of arranging all the fossils of this family, and dividing them into groups; but the subject is very extensive, the difficulty attending the investigation is great, and my avocations allow me but little time to devote to it. I have thought it better to limit myself to the preceding observations, and leave them to the test of examination by other observers. I wish, however, to point out another peculiarity in the structure of Orthocerata, which is to be found in the septa of the chambers. The accompanying representation, PI. LX., fig. 4, of one from Russia, is the best example I have met with. The laminae of the septa in these cases appear to separate, and leave a considerable space between them; on one side of the chamber the line of the upper lamina is peculiarly curved, and seems to follow a regular law, as the form is similar in each septum.
  I cannot at present say, if this peculiarity is confined to a particular division of the Orthocerata. The Russian specimen may probably belong to the division Ormoceras, which has the siphuncle divided into portions. This is not positive ; but the same peculiarity is seen in Ormoceras Bayfieldii and O. JVhitei. I have also observed a nearly similar arrangement in Lituolite. It must be noticed, however, that as this separation of the laminae of the septa is only on one side of the shell, consequently our knowledge of this peculiar structure is only to be obtained from the sections laid open by accidental fracture, or by those made artificially, and mostly for other purposes than the ascertaining of this point.
     A considerable difficulty exists in the examination of these fossils in many cases, particularly in those where the substance of the fossil is replaced by silex. A fracture, or a section by art, does not so clearly show the structure of the fossil, as its exposure by the slow action of the weather; and hence we greatly depend on accident for obtaining our information.
   In other cases, the substance of the shell is entirely wanting, and vacant spaces alone represent the form of the fossil. This has been noticed in the Actinoceras Bigsbii from Thessalon Island; and the same thing is constant in regard to the septa of Baculites found at Maestricht. It may perhaps be worth consideration, whether the nature of the substance of which these parts of the animal was composed, has much influence on the preservation or nonpreservation of them in the fossil state; and I would suggest that it is always worthy of observation, what is the condition of the greater number of other fossils found in the same rock. In the case of Maestricht, we find some shells and corals and the crusts of crabs preserved ; but the septa of Baculites are always wanting, although sometifnes we can find traces of their thin external shell. I notice this, however, merely for the purpose of exciting observation, because I am not aware if it has ever been made a subject of inquiry.
  If, from what has here been stated, it shall appear probable that the Huroniae are the remains of Orthocerata, and that the shelly part of some of the animals of this family was so thin as to have been generally destroyed, we shall be led to the belief that the fossils figured in Dr. Bigsby’s paper, at PI. XXX. of Vol. i. Geol. Trans., 2d. Series, also belong to Orthocerata; and though there is not evidence to establish conclusive proof that they were so, yet the conjecture becomes more probable, from our inability to associate these remains with any other known organic structure.
  These would open to us a great variety of forms for the animals of the Orthoceratidse, in addition to those indicated by the different forms of the decidedly chambered shells with siphuncles, which are found in the older rocks, of which there are many undescribed kinds, and which have always been attributed to this family.
  We find these remains sometimes of conical shape, tapering rapidly ; sometimes curved, and at other times of great length, and tapering very gradually. The animals to which they belonged were, no doubt, the Carnivora of the ancient seas, in the mud of which their remains have been preserved, along with those of contemporaneous animals of species on which they preyed; and it is of some interest to imagine an abundant variety in their forms as great as was that of the Saurians of a later period, when that race of gigantic devourers was called into existence.

  It may be asked, why we do not find rhyncholites in these older rocks ? but I do not feel the objection to be of much importance, when I consider the comparative rarity of those fossils in the rocks in which the Ammonites are so numerous.
  It will not be doubted that these chambered shells belonged to the carnivorous race of Cephalopods : we know of no other remains in these older rocks which can be attributed to carnivorous marine animals, except some few fishes; and it is quite in unison with the other observations that have been made in the natural history of organic remains, to find a great variety of forms of this family existing at one period, when they were the chief agents in performing the duties allotted to the marine Carnivora, and to find that their representatives in this family were subsequently confined to the forms of Ammonites and Belemnites, when other creatures, such as the Saurians, were created to take a part in the important task assigned to them. A similar change is the appearance of carnivorous Trachelopods at a later period, on which subject are some good observations first pointed out in a paper by Mr. Dillwyn, in the Philosophical Transactions for 1823.


