THE vicinity of Smyrna presents geological phaenomena of considerable interest, and of a more complicated kind than is usual in Asia Minor. A residence there during the winter of 1835-36 enabled Mr. Hamilton and myself to investigate this district with greater attention, than we could bestow upon the other parts of Asia Minor, which we visited ; and its geology may, therefore, deserve to be laid before the Society in a separate communication.
   The details of the paper can be understood only by reference to the accompanying map, PI. XXXII., and by a general description of the geographical features of the district.
   The Bay of Smyrna and the alluvial plain at its upper end lie between two parallel ridges of high land, ranging from east to west. That on the north commences with the lofty hill of Sipylus, rising abruptly from the plain of Sardis; and this ridge, which separates the waters of the Hermus from the Bay of Smyrna, terminates at Menimen near the estuary of that river, the western part being known by the name of Cordileon. Its total length is about thirty-two miles.
   The ridge on the south side of Smyrna Bay, begins with Mount Tartali, the ancient Mastusia, which is the western termination of the Tmolus range. Descending towards the west it passes into the table-land which overhangs Smyrna on the south. Further west the country again rises and forms the group of conical mountains, anciently called Corax, which terminates at the Isthmus of Vourla. The distance from Mount Tartali to Vourla is about twenty-four miles.
   These two lofty ranges are united at the Pass of Cavakludere by a transverse ridge, which separates the Vale of Nimphi from that of Smyrna, and completely isolates the latter.
   The rocks in the vicinity of Smyrna belong to the following formations.
   The general features of these and the other formations of Asia Minor were explained in a paper laid before the Society on November 2, 1836.
   In the Smyrna district, the mountains of the hippurite limestone formation apparently once contributed to form the boundary of a great lake, in which calcareous matter was deposited to the depth of many hundred feet. Two vast eruptions of igneous matter have since taken place, one on the north, the other on the south of the present Bay of Smyrna. These convulsions produced great changes in the form of the surface, and in the arrangement of pre-existing rocks, and the study of this district is thus rendered both interesting and difficult.
   As the phenomena exhibited on the north of the Bay of Smyrna are not visibly connected with those on the south side, it will be best to consider each portion of the district separately. I will begin with the southern side, and take the formations in the order of age.
   1. The micaceous schist and saccharine marble, which compose the ridge of Mount Tmolus, terminate near the village of Trianda, and form part of the eastern boundary of the lacustrine formation. The micaceous schists of Asia Minor being fully described in the memoir before alluded to, it is needless to repeat their characters in this paper.
   2. The compact gray limestone with Hippurites is, in this district, associated with an abundance of compact sandstone and schist, of black, greenish, or cream-coloured hues. The whole formation has been so greatly disturbed, that it is difficult to determine, whether the sandstone and schists were deposited above or beneath the limestone; but their union with it is too intimate to admit of their being regarded as a distinct formation. They seem analogous to the greenish sandstones of the Morea and the macignos of Tuscany and Trieste, all of which have been referred to the cretaceous system.
   The western boundary of the hippurite limestone of Mount Tartali is at the village of Cucklujah, whence it extends eastward for perhaps fifteen or twenty miles, along the northern declivity of Mount Tmolus. Further details respecting it at this locality will be found in the memoir alluded to.
   The range of Mount Corax consists almost entirely of sandstones and shales, but at one point, about 3^ miles west of Smyrna, a small mass of gray limestone is exposed, and serves to identify these rocks with those of Mount Tartali.
   Around the village of Baltchikeui the shales are of a pale cream colour, soft and friable, and contain a considerable admixture of sand, which is sometimes so coarse as to become a conglomerate of fragments of quartz, a quarter of an inch in diameter.
   About 8 mile beyond Baltchikeui is a thermal spring, on the site of a temple to Apollo mentioned by Strabo. In the ravine immediately above it, the beds of shale are dark-coloured and compact, dipping thirty or forty degrees to the northward.
   3. Tertiary lacustrine limestone.
   This deposit forms an extensive table-land, ranging southward from Smyrna for about fifteen miles. On the east it abuts unconformably against the hippu- rite limestone of Tartali and the micaceous schist of Tmolus, and on the west it is bordered by the range of Mount Corax. The southern boundary is near Trianda, where the formation rises above the alluvial plain of Tourbali; but the original barriers of the lake on that side are not now apparent. This area is occupied principally by white or yellowish limestone, varying in texture from lithographic stone to soft chalk. The more compact beds closely resemble the secondary limestones of the Ionian Islands, and like them contain nodules and layers of black flint and quartz resinite. Prom this resemblance we were at first inclined to refer the compact limestone near Smyrna to the secondary series, but after a close search Mr. Hamilton and myself succeeded in finding lacustrine shells (see p. 402) which indicate a tertiary epoch. The flints and quartz resinite exhibit an analogy to those in the lacustrine deposits of Auvergne and of the Cantal, as described by Mr. Lyell and Mr. Murchison.
   White and greenish marls are often interstratified with the limestone, and are most abundant in the central parts of the area between Boudjah and Sedikeui. About two miles north-east of the latter place the marls contain traces of vegetable remains, and are accompanied by extensive beds of gravel, which both alternate with and overlie them. These gravel beds much resemble the ancient drift or alluvium of England, but are merely a local portion of the lacustrine deposit. They contain rolled pebbles of nummulitic limestone and schist, derived from the surrounding mountains, also fragments of red trachyte similar to that which occurs, en masse, near Smyrna.
   As is usual with the lacustrine basins of Asia Minor, the beds of limestone and marl pass into conglomerate as they approach the foot of the surrounding mountains. The southern boundary of this formation near Trianda consists almost wholly of gravel imbedded in yellow clay.
   The pebbles of trachyte, in the central parts of the formation, appear to prove that, at this point, the lacustrine deposits were continued after the eruption of trachyte, which overlies them near Smyrna. The bed of the lake being probably lowest in the centre, water might lodge there, after the main body of the lake had been drained by the igneous eruption ; and streams flowing from all sides would carry to this point the pebbles which, during the quiescent state of the lake, formed a shingle beach around its margin. In course of time the denudation of the outlet would complete the work of desiccation, and the whole drainage, of what is now the Plain of Sedikeui, would reach the sea by the ravine at present traversed by the Meles. That all these operations have taken place, will, I think, be evident to any one, who will make a careful survey of the locality.
   The stratification of the lacustrine series is, in general, nearly horizontal ; some local exceptions, however, exist in the vicinity of the igneous rocks.
   4. Trachytic rocks.
   The greater part of the lacustrine series had been deposited, when the basin of Smyrna became the seat of volcanic action ; and an enormous mass of trachytic matter was poured forth, and spread over the bed of the lake. The eruption appears to have ceased as suddenly as it began, for there are no alternations of trachytic and lacustrine rocks,—no injection of dykes, or other phaenomena, which indicate a long continuance of igneous action.
   These rocks occupy a surface of about five miles by two, and a reddish- brown, porphyritic variety prevails throughout nearly the whole area. A remarkable feature in the trachyte is the close approach, which it occasionally makes to a stratified structure. It splits into slabs from a foot to an inch in thickness, and their cross section exhibits stripes of various colours, parallel to the planes of cleavage. These strata (if they may be so called) are in some places accumulated to the thickness of one hundred feet, and are traceable laterally for as many yards. This is especially the case on the hills about two miles west of Smyrna. The crystalline texture of this stratified trachyte decidedly indicates igneous fusion, and the explanation of this peculiar structure is, therefore, by no means easy. It may, however, be conjectured, that when the fluid trachyte expanded horizontally from the point of eruption, any variations of substance or texture would be drawn out and extended in planes parallel to the horizon, and when cooled would cause coloured stripes and fissures in the rock, in the direction of those planes. It must, however, be observed that the apparent strata are now far removed from the horizontal position, supposing them to have once occupied it.
   These trachytic rocks are, in general, homogeneous, but in some places, they contain numerous angular blocks and fragments of black porphyritic trachyte, much harder than the reddish paste in which they are imbedded. This species of conglomerate is well developed, about 2 miles west of Smyrna, in a ravine near the sea.
   On the north side the trachytic rocks descend to the shore, but along their southern border, they overlie the lacustrine limestone and marl of the Plain of Sedikeui. The boundary of the two formations is well defined, the trachyte terminating abruptly, with a steep slope, like the margin of a modern lava coulee. A stratum of pumiceous tufa is commonly interposed, between the trachyte and the lacustrine strata. The uppermost bed of the latter is a conglomerate of rounded pebbles of quartz, hippurite limestone, and schist, but not the least trace of any igneous rock is discoverable in it. Beneath this bed are calcareous marls, containing Planorbes and other fresh-water shells, and passing downwards into white limestone.
   The absence of igneous products in the conglomerate proves the sudden eruption of the trachyte which reposes on it; yet it is possible that this bed of transported pebbles may be connected with that event. Earthquakes preceding the eruption may have caused currents in the lake, which would wash these rolled pebbles from its gravelly margin into its central parts, and terminate that long period of repose, during which the subjacent marls and limestones were deposited.
   The highest point attained by the trachyte is about 3 miles S.YV. from Smyrna, near the valley which separates these rocks from the Corax range. The view from this eminence proves how much the picturesque and botanical features of a country depend on its geology. On the south is the vast, undulating plain of lacustrine limestone and marl, the greater part of which is cultivated and interspersed with villages. On the west, the decomposing sandstone and shale of Corax form a cluster of conical mountains thickly covered by evergreen shrubs. In the east, the view is terminated by Mount Tartali, where the compact gray hippurite limestone forms crags and precipices, with fir and other trees sparingly scattered among them. Lastly, the trachytic rocks in the foreground produce neither trees nor shrubs, but present innumerable masses of naked rock, jutting through a fine green turf, adapted only for pasturage.
  Having now given a general sketch of the sedimentary and volcanic rocks which occur near Smyrna, I will introduce a more detailed account of Mount Pagus, where several of them are brought to view within a very small space. (Plate XXXII., Sec. Nos. 1 and 2.)
   The hill anciently called Pagus rises immediately to the south of the modern town of Smyrna. It forms the north-eastern extremity of the mass of trachytic rocks above described; and a deep ravine separates it on the east and south from the plateau of lacustrine deposits, whose drainage produces the classic river Meles, which escapes into the sea through this ravine.
  The height of Mount Pagus may be estimated at about 500 feet. It is principally composed of trachyte and trachytic conglomerate, which on the east and south extend from the summit to the bed of the Meles ; but along the northern declivity they terminate about half-way down, and repose on strata of the lacustrine series. The uppermost of these freshwater beds is here, as elsewhere, a conglomerate of gray limestone, schist, and quartz, in rolled fragments. It passes downwards into beds of sand which may be traced by means of ravines and sandpits for a depth of more than 100 feet, till the houses of Smyrna preclude further search. At the lowest visible point, the sand contains abundant impressions of leaves; also, though more rarely, imperfect shells of Helix and Unio, which identify it with the lacustrine formation.
   It is remarkable that these beds of sand and conglomerate dip about 20° towards the trachyte of Mount Pagus, which, having been erupted subsequently to their deposition, might be expected to have heaved them in an opposite direction. They are clearly not overturned, because the conglomerate of limestone pebbles is here in its regular position, on the top of the other lacustrine strata.
   At the north-eastern side of the hill, the sand is replaced by beds of marl and white limestone containing Planorbes; and above them is the never-failing conglomerate, extending under the trachyte. (See PI. XXXII., Sec. No. 1.)
   A few yards lower down, at the foot of the hill near the Caravan bridge, we come unexpectedly upon a rugged mass of rocks belonging to the hippu- rite limestone formation. Its whole area does not much exceed an acre, and we must suppose that it has been brought up by some convulsion, connected with the outbursts of trachyte in the vicinity. It consists of friable, marly, cream-coloured shale, similar to that at Baltchikeui, and it contains veins of crystalline carbonate of lime, and some masses of a hard, yellowish, calcareo-siliceons stone. The stratification is very obscure, but as far as it could be determined, it dips towards Mount Pagus, conformably with the lacustrine marls, a few yards higher up. These friable schists are extensively quarried, and when broken small are used in Smyrna for garden walks and terraced roofs. On the east side of the schist are some irregular masses of compact, gray limestone, similar to that which, in Mount Tartali, contains Ilippurites; and they identify the whole of these dislocated rocks with that formation.
   About half a mile N.E. of this point, is a small, isolated hillock of trachyte, the elevation of which may have caused the otherwise anomalous dip of the lacustrine strata, on the N. and N.E. sides of Mount Pagus. (See Section J.)
   The right bank of the Meles, opposite Mount Pagus, presents an escarpment of the lacustrine formation. (See Section 2.) The trachytic rocks on this side are of small extent, but rise, in one place, about half-way up the south side of the ravine, and appear to abut against the edges of the lacustrine strata, which form the upper portion of the hill. The highest stratum exposed, is a compact white limestone, containing, though rarely, a small species of Paludina. A singular substance is also found here, being an aggregate of coarse crystals of carbonate of lime, but too loosely united to constitute saccharine marble.
  Below the limestone containing Paludina;, strata of marl with calcareous nodules are exposed, till they are obscured by the trachyte below. The only alteration apparent in the lacustrine strata, from their contact with the igneous rock, consists in a greenish colour imparted to the marl, limestone, and accompanying flint or resinite, and not observable at a distance from it.
  In descending from this point to the ford through the Meles, a singular mass of conglomerate is found in the midst of the trachyte. It consists of rolled quartz pebbles, imbedded partly in a red and partly in a bright green paste. This mass, which is but a few feet in extent, seems to have been derived from the subjacent lacustrine beds, and caught up by the trachyte. Near this point, the latter rock contains some veins of white chalcedony.
  We now proceed to the geology of the north side of Smyrna Bay, where phaenomena are exhibited similar to those, which are described above.
  The gray limestone of Mount Sipylus seems to have formed part of the northern margin of that ancient lake, which was bounded on the east by Mount Tartali, and on the west by Corax ; as lacustrine strata still flank the south side of Mount Sipylus; and they probably once extended across the alluvial plain from Bournabat to Cucklujah. Whether that extensive vale has been formed by denudation or by subsidence is uncertain, but its origin is probably connected with the igneous action, which has convulsed the district.
  A vast eruption of trachytic matter, apparently contemporary with that near Smyrna, has on this side also broken up and overlaid the lacustrine deposits. It forms the western half of the Sipylus range, called Cordileon, a mountain whose height may be estimated at about 2000 feet above the sea.
  §. 1. The eastern part of Sipylus consists of compact gray limestone, rising precipitously from the plain of the Hermus. Further westward, the limestone is accompanied by black and greenish shales, resembling those of Tartali, before mentioned. The boundary between this formation and the trachytic rocks coincides in general with the ravine, which descends from the lake of Kizghioul to Bournabat, but considerable intermixture of these two rocks occurs along the line of junction.

  §. 2. The lacustrine beds repose against the southern slope of Mount Sipylus, from Djaki-keui, in the Vale of Nimplii, to Bournabat, where they are covered up by the trachytic rocks. The most interesting sections of them are on the west side of the ravine, about half a mile north of Bournabat; and the right bank of the torrent here exhibits the phaenomena shown in section 4. A small outburst of red trachyte has heaved up strata of white and greenish marl, containing concretionary masses of brown, hard, crystalline limestone. Some of these masses are thickly perforated with sinuous tubes, and resemble travertin formed around reeds; yet it is doubtful whether the tubes originated in any organic body. Above these strata is a succession of whitish calcareous marls, extending about 200 yards to the northward, and dipping 35° N. In one place, a thin bed of brown clay is interposed, and contains fragments of shells and vegetables.
  The upper part of these marly beds affords a rich mine to the student in fossil botany ; some of the strata being crowded with leaves and other portions of plants, perfectly preserved. The substance of the leaves commonly remains of a ferruginous colour, and contrasts beautifully with the pale cream-coloured matrix.
  The leaves belong to about twelve species of trees ; and some of them appear referable to the genera Laurus, Nerium, Olea, Salix, Quercus, and Tamarix, all which still flourish in Asia Minor; but it is yet undetermined, whether any of them are identical with existing species.
  These fossil vegetable remains are accompanied by shells of the genera Cyclas, Paludina, Planorbis, and Cypris.
  Lacustrine marls occupy the west side of the ravine, to the height of perhaps 150 feet above the spot, where the fossil plants occur. Their junction with the overlying igneous rocks affords the following interesting series of beds. (See also Plate XXXII., Section No. 1 and 3.)
 All the strata, from No. 2 to 5 inclusive, are conformable, and dip about 20° s.w.

   §. 3. Trachytic Rocks.—These extend westward from the torrent of Bournabat to the mouth of the Hermus, and compose, as before stated, the whole mountain of Cordileon. The prevailing rock is a reddish brown tra chyte, identical with that of Smyrna, and, like it, is occasionally divided into laminae resembling strata.
   The junction of these rocks with the lacustrine beds near Bournabat, is already described. In following up the ravine to the lakes of Kizghioul and Karaghioul, several varieties of trachyte and tufaceous rocks occur along the junction of the hippurite limestone and schist. At the lake of Kizghioul, a branch from the igneous rocks extends to the eastward for some distance. The Section, No. 5., Plate XXXII., is here exposed.
   About four miles further west, immediately opposite Smyrna, (see Map) a long, narrow ridge descends the side of Cordileon, and divides the waters of two torrents. The composition of this ridge differs greatly from that of the brown trachyte of the surrounding hills. It consists of decomposing felspar, principally of a white or yellow colour, yet it presents also various shades of red and brown. It has a soapy feel, and would perhaps be a valuable material for pottery. At the upper end of the ridge, near a village, is a steep, broken escarpment, where some dikes of bluish and reddish trachyte penetrate the light-coloured substance, above described.
   The soft, decomposing state of this rock has given that smooth, rounded form to the ridge which so strongly contrasts it with the rugged neighbouring hills. Its surface is covered with rounded, erratic bowlders of brown trachyte, probably brought down by the torrents, which now flow on each side of the ridge, at a time when they occupied a higher level.
   From an inspection of hand specimens, it would not be easy to decide, whether this white earthy trachyte has been altered since its ejection, or whether it was originally poured forth in a different state from the ordinary brown trachyte. The latter opinion, however, is the most probable, if we consider first, the complete dissimilarity between this rock and those which immediately surround it; and secondly, the manner in which this long ridge descends, like a coulee, from the higher parts of Cordileon.
   These are the principal phaenomena which I noticed on the north side of the Bay of Smyrna; and it will be seen that they present a great analogy to those on the south.
   The geological events to be inferred from the facts described in this paper, may be summed up as follows:—
    1. An elevation of several mountains, composed of rocks of the cretaceous age.
  2. A long and tranquil deposition of lacustrine matter, with shells and vegetables, in a depression between these mountains.
  3. A sudden eruption, at two principal points, of igneous matter, which broke up and overlaid the deposits of the lake, and drained the greater part of its waters. It seems to have been preceded by a commotion in the lake, spreading non-volcanic pebbles over the bottom.
  4. A more or less sudden cessation of the igneous action, proved positively by the homogeneous character of the erupted rocks, and negatively by the general absence of injected dikes, or of alternate coulees of trachyte, tufa, &c., such as are seen in Mont D'Or.
  5. A continuance of aqueous deposition in the central and lowest point of the lake after the igneous eruption, proved by beds of marl, alternating with gravel, containing trachytic pebbles.
  6. The drainage of this remnant of the lake by the denudation of its outlet, now traversed by the Meles.
   The specimens of those fossils, which were obtained, are not sufficiently perfect to warrant a greater degree of precision in their determination. Indeed, fossil fresh-water shells rarely possess characters sufficiently marked to form the basis of accurate specific distinctions.


