DURING a short residence at Constantinople, in March 1836, I made some researches into the geology of its vicinity. A very cursory examination sufficed to show, that the district was unexplored, and that the brief geological remarks, which exist in the works of other travellers, are very unsatisfactory. I therefore communicate my observations to the Society, in the hope that, though slight, they may serve as a guide to those geologists who may hereafter be induced to explore this interesting district.
   The formations in the neighbourhood of the Bosphorus may be classed as follows:—
1. Silurian Schist and Limestone.
   This formation occupies both sides of the Bosphorus for about three quarters of its length, and extends thence towards the W.N.W. and E.S.E., to an unascertained distance in Europe and Asia. It may probably form a great part of the Balcan range, of which the hills above the Bosphorus are a continuation.

  The formation may be described as a mass of argillaceous schist, compact brown sandstone, and compact dark blue limestone, passing into each other by insensible gradations. The argillaceous schist predominates greatly over the other two rocks, and frequently exhibits an oblique or slaty cleavage. The whole formation bears a close analogy to the lower Silurian and upper Cambrian series, exhibited in Wales and Devonshire. From its resemblance to the type of northern Europe, Andreossy* and an American travellerf referred it to the transition series on mineralogical grounds alone; and this opinion is now confirmed by the discovery of organic remains, analogous to those of the Silurian rocks of Britain. This fact is interesting, from the extreme rarity of fossils in deposits of this early age in the southern parts of Europe.
  The stratification of these rocks is in general much disturbed and contorted ; and in other cases it is very obscure and difficult to detect. Hence it would require a closer examination than I was able to give, to establish the prevailing strike of the formation.
  Organic remains appear to be extremely local, and were noticed in only two localities. The first of these is in the ravine above Arnaout-keui, a village about four miles from Pera, on the European side. The rock is an argillo- calcareous schist, splitting at an angle, oblique to the stratification, impressions of various Brachiopoda and joints of Crinoideae occur in it, lying in the planes of stratification. The substance of the shells has perished, leaving a brown dust; and the casts are in general much distorted by the compression and consolidation of the strata.
  These remains were first noticed by M. Fontanierj;, who mistook the shells for Pectines, and thence inferred that this was a secondary formation. Had he examined them with more care, he would probably have agreed with M. Andreossy, who, without the assistance of organic remains, referred these rocks, as already stated, to the transition era.
  The only other locality, where organic remains were seen, is on the hill called the Giant’s Mountain, on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, about fifteen miles from Constantinople. It is singular that of three authors, who have noticed with more or less exactness the geology of this hill, not one has remarked the numerous and interesting fossils which occur there.

The lower part of the hill consists of compact limestone, thickly bedded, of a dark grey colour, and slightly crystalline. It is exposed in extensive quarries, where it is traversed by some remarkable trap-dikes, to be mentioned hereafter. Organic remains are rare in the limestone; but I detected a few impressions of Terebratulae and crinoidal stems, exhibiting the same crystalline fracture, which distinguishes them in the carboniferous and other limestones of England.
  Above the limestone is an argillaceous schist, with an oblique cleavage, and it extends to the summit of the hill. Impressions of shells, similar to those of Arnaout-keui, occur in it in many places, and in tolerable abundance. I have found only one specimen, which can be referred to the family of Trilo- bites. It is a small fragment, but it so accurately exhibits the structure of the eye of an Asaphus, that I have no hesitation in referring it to that genus.
  The following is a list of the fossils of this formation, as far as the imperfection of the specimens admits of identification. I am indebted to Mr. Murchison and Mr. James De Carl Sowerby for assistance in determining these fossils.
  Should any geologist ever devote that share of time and attention to this country, which it well deserves, he would probably find several other localities for these Silurian fossils, and perhaps be rewarded by the discovery of many Trilohites and other organic remains, which I did not meet with.
   The compact limestone of this formation is quarried in several places near the Bosphorus, especially at Baltalimani, where it dips to the westward. In the lower part the strata are thick, but they become thinner upwards, and, after assuming a concretionary structure, pass into argillaceous schist. The limestone exhibits some very obscure traces of organic remains.
   The sandstones are best exhibited in the cliff between Scutari and Mondabornou. They are brown, commonly compact, sometimes schistose, and the stratification is distinct, being much broken and distorted.
   The evidence of the organic remains justifies me in referring the formation to the Silurian system of Britain. The occurrence in this remote locality of rocks, which approach so closely to the type of north-western Europe, is somewhat remarkable ; and the more so, as nothing of the kind occurs, as far as l know, in the more southern parts of Asia Minor, or in any portion of the Mediterranean basin. Many geologists are of opinion, that the transition and secondary rocks of northern Europe belong to a different type from those of the Mediterranean basin ; and that the characters, both mineral and zoological, of these two parallel series present scarcely any common points of comparison. A line, nearly coinciding with the Pyrenees and Alps, appears to divide these two great basins, if we may so term them. Further investigations may perhaps show, that this line admits of being continued from the Alps through European Turkey to the range of the Mysian and Bithynian Olympus ; and this may explain the appearance at Constantinople of rocks belonging to the type of northern Europe, which are wanting further south in Asia Minor.
   The transition formations, which we have been considering, unite on the north to a mass of igneous rocks, and on the south-west to tertiary deposits. At present, I have no clue to the relative age of the two latter, but as the igneous rocks are in more immediate relation with the Silurian group, I will notice them next.
2. Igneous Rocks.
   The igneous rocks of the Bosphorus may be described, in the aggregate, as consisting of trachyte and trachytic conglomerate. On the Asiatic side they commence, en masse, at Kavak under the old Genoese castle, and extend thence to Yoom-bornou on the Black Sea, or perhaps further. They consist chiefly of angular trachytic fragments, imbedded in a tufaceous paste. The conglomerates, viewed on the large scale, are distinctly stratified ; and from Kavak to Anadoli-fanar they have a regular inclination towards the north. They rest upon, or alternate with, trachytic rocks, more or less compact, and occasionally passing into phonolite and basalt. In some places, especially near Anadoli-fanar, dikes of the latter substance intersect the conglomerate beds. The basalt occasionally assumes a columnar form, which is seen in the greatest perfection at Yoom-bornou. The prevailing colour of these rocks is greenish, owing to the presence of copper, a circumstance which gave the name of Cyaneae to the weather-beaten rocks of the Symplegades.
   Near Filbornou the conglomerate contains bowlders of a brownish trachyte, softer than the greenish trachytic paste which envelopes them ; hence they decompose with the weather, and give a honey-combed appearance to the rock. The contrary, however, is more often the case, when the imbedded fragments, being harder than their matrix, project above the general surface of the rocks.
   These igneous formations contain many veins of red and white cornelian, and varieties of chalcedony. In one place near Filbornou the veins are perpendicular and straight, intersecting the conglomerate, and cutting indiscriminately through the tufaceous paste and the imbedded fragments.—See the accompanying wood-cut.
   The deposition of these conglomerates appears to have been effected with the assistance, if not solely by, water. The fragments imbedded in them, though commonly angular, are sometimes rounded, and are contained in fiuely laminated strata of volcanic sand. An instance of this, on the north side of Anadoli-fanar, is represented in the following wood-cut.
   On the European side of the Bosphorus, the igneous rocks commence on the north of Buyukdere. Here a species of trachyte of a yellow colour forms some considerable hills. It is much decomposed, and resembles loose sand, when viewed at a distance. Further north is a series of conglomerate beds, similar to those of the Asiatic side, and extending to the Black Sea.
   These are the general features of the mass of igneous rocks, which abuts against the northern flank of the Silurian schists above described. The works of MM. Andreossy and Fontanier contain some information on their mineral contents.
   A variety of trachytic and trap dikes occur in the Silurian schists, and are doubtless connected with the general mass of igneous formations. At Baltalimani and on the hills above Bebek, a ferruginous decomposing trachyte appears in the midst of the schistose rocks. At Kiretch-bornou is a dike of finegrained greenish trap, about 15 feet in thickness, cutting through strata of calcareous and argillaceous schist. A similar dyke occurs in the limestone quarries at the base of the Giant’s Mountain. It is perpendicular, 4 or 5 feet thick, and from the removal of the limestone on each side, it resembles a wall running across the quarry. Some fragments of limestone occur in the midst of the trap, but neither they nor the rock on each side of the dike, show any signs of alteration.
   Lower down in the quarry, near the level of the Bosphorus, are some masses of greenish and white quartz rock, which have more the appearance of an altered sandstone than of an igneous injected rock.
3. Tertiary Formation.
   This formation commences immediately on the west of Constantinople, and extends along the north coast of the sea of Marmora for many miles, its western limit being at present undetermined. On the west side of Constantinople the formation ranges inland for about three miles, till it meets the transition series, but the nature of the junction is not exposed by any section, which I could meet with.
   The beds are best exhibited in the quarries at Baloukli and Makri-keui; where they consist of soft white shelly limestones and marls, resting on sand without fossils. The stratification is in general horizontal, a character common to nearly all the tertiary formations, which I saw in Turkey.
  That portion of this deposit which occurs near Constantinople appears to have been accumulated in an estuary. The most abundant shell is an oval, subtriangular bivalve, apparently a Mactra, which composes almost the entire substance of some of the beds; there is also a ribbed bivalve resembling a Cardium. These are apparently the only fossils which belonged to marine genera, all the rest having been natives either of the land or of fresh water.
  The terrestrial shells are remarkable for their near approach to existing forms. They are less generally diffused than the marine and fresh-water species, but are abundant in the quarries at Makri-keui.
  A single specimen of a bone occurred in this formation, but it is too imperfect for me to decide, whether it belongs to a mammifer or to a reptile.
  I found no traces of a tertiary deposit along the banks of the Bosphorus, whence it may be inferred that this channel has been opened at a comparatively late period. Tertiary beds are said to exist along the shores of the Euxine; and lignite has been worked for fuel at Domouz-deri, a few miles west of the Bosphorus.
4. Ancient Alluvium.
  A few miles north of Constantinople are some extensive deposits of clay, sand, and gravel, reposing on the Silurian schist. The latter formation is barren and devoid of trees, but the alluvial clay favours the growth of the oak and causes the forest of Belgrade. These deposits are of great thickness and consist chiefly of ferruginous clay, with pebbles and bowlders of quartzose and sandstone rocks interspersed. The general want of stratification and the rounded form of the bowlders, denote an aqueous action of considerable violence. These accumulations of detritus appear to skirt the southern side of the Lesser Balcan range towards the N.W.
  Taken as a whole, the deposits bear a close analogy to those which in England have been called diluvium ; and they appear to have resulted from causes acting on a greater scale than any of those, which produced the local alluvia, noticed by me in Asia Minor.

