IN exhibiting to the Geological Society some interesting fossil shells, collected in Cutch by Capt. Smee, of the Bombay army, I have to make my acknowledgements to Mr. James de Carle Sowerby for his assistance in determining the various specimens. The locality from which they were obtained is in the province of Choorwaugur, between the 23rd and 24th parallels of north latitude, and the 70th and 71st degrees of east longitude. On the east and north it is bounded by the celebrated Runn, a tract of low lands, one part of which is periodically overflowed, another is salt marsh, and a third sandy desert; and, extending from the mouths of the Indus to the head of the Gulf of Cutch, it gives the country an insular character.
  I shall confine the notice to a few short remarks on the specimens. Of Ammonites there are several species, and one of them bears so close a resemblance to A. Harveyii of the oolitic series of England, that Mr. Sowerby cannot satisfy himself that there is any difference (see fig, 1, wood-cut,p. 719). The new species are figured in Plate LXL The whole of the specimens were obtained from the red rock in the neighbourhood of Shahpoor and Kuntkote.
  Trigonia. Imbedded in the mouth of Ammonites Harveyii (woodcut, fig. 1, p. 719), is apparently a young specimen of Trigonia costata, a shell characteristic of the oolitic rocks of England]. Another species which Mr. Sowerby considers to be new, I have named after Capt. Smee. It occurs in the water-courses and the ploughed fields about Shahpoor, but the specimens do not appear to have been water-worn. (See PI. LXI. fig. 5.)
  Astarte. Of this genus Mr. Sowerby has determined two new species. They were met with under similar circumstances to the Trigonia, (fig. 1 & 2.)
  Corbula. An undescribed species occurs abundantly in an indurated ferruginous rock at Dookurwarra in the Runn, at the north-east point of Cutch, in the 71st degree of longitude. The strata are highly-inclined and very thin, and transverse sections of the slabs present a beautiful appearance. It is not associated with the other shells.
  Gryphoea. A specimen belonging to this genus so closely resembles the Gryphcea dilatata of the Oxford clay of England, that Mr. Sowerby has not been able to separate specifically the Cutch fossil from it. (See wood-cut, fig. 2.) Other specimens, varieties apparently of this shell, occur in Capt. Smee’s collection, and differ in the back of the lower valves being more convex and the beak more prominent. They were all found under the same circumstances as the Trigonia.
  Capt. Smee’s series also contains specimens of Lycophrys, presented to him by Dr. Burnes of the Booj Residency. They are said to be thrown up in ridges near Luckput Bunder. In addition to the shells, the collection includes fragments of silicified fossil wood, and radiated iron pyrites similar to that contained in the chalk of England.
  I have also to point out to the Society specimens of alabaster and a hard and durable oolite from my own collection ; the former from Cutch, and the latter from near Poorbunder on the west coast of the peninsula of Goojrat. This rock would appear to characterize the major part of the western portion of the province, as it is found abundantly at Raujcote in the centre of the peninsula. The oolite is used in that magnificent structure the town-hall of Bombay. It does not appear to resemble exactly any of the characteristic oolites of England.
  Lignite. I close the catalogue with a specimen of lignite from Cutch. Attempts were made by the government to work this coal ; but whether from mismanagement or from other causes, they were not persevered in, and I believe the beds at present lie undisturbed. The locality is at the village of Tramboa, from 6 to 8 miles north of Booj. Traces of coal are also met with in many other places.
  As the tracts whence the above specimens came have not been visited by a geologist, it may scarcely be prudent to speculate on the age of the formation to which they belong-. If generalizations in geology in Europe be subject to exceptions, we shall run no small risk in applying European analogies to India; where we find coal occurring without the carboniferous series—a total absence of the cretaceous formation, and trap occupying whole regions without the intervention of any sedimentary rock, and without the appearance of modern or even ancient volcanos. Were we to judge of the N.W. coast of India in the neighbourhood of the localities of the above specimens, from its general flatness, its salt marshes, and the extent of the Runn, we might consider it as recently emerged from the ocean, and comparatively modern fossil4hells might have been looked for. The inhabitants, indeed, consider the surface of inland water as gradually contracting, and the period may arrive when the Runn shall disappear. If English analogues be our guide, the fossil specimens I have submitted to the Society would seem to belong to the secondary rocks; Ammonites, Trigoniee, and Grt/phcea have been found only in formations below the tertiary systems,—we may not therefore err in considering the formations of Cutch to be secondary. Quarries of fine crystallized marble are found at Nuggur Parker on the north bank of the Runn.
 The strata of Cutch have been much disturbed by the intrusion of igneous rocks, which in fact are the highest in the country, and it is still subject to earthquakes. The country furnishes an abundant supply of iron ore. It is much to be regretted that the East India Company have not deputed a scientific person to examine Cutch and Goojrat, as the cost of the undertaking would very probably be amply repaid by the discovery of their mineral treasures ; and a yet higher advantage would be obtained in the light which would be thrown on the history of the earth.
Note.—November 4th, 1837.
 When the specimens alluded to in the preceding notice were first submitted to the examination of the Society, the unexpected resemblance which some of them were found to bear to English oolitic fossils, gave rise to doubts whether English shells had not accidentally got into Capt. Smee’s collection. To clear up these doubts, I wrote to my friend Colonel Pottingerf, the British Minister in Cutch, to collect for me, far and wide, all the organic remains to be met with. Colonel Pottinger, with that zeal which always characterizes his prosecution of useful objects, so effectually realized my wishes, that in a comparatively short time, a large collection of fossils reached me in England ; a series of these I presented to the Society, and on examination, the genuineness of Captain Smee’s fossils was fully established from identical species being met with in the collection. Shortly afterwards, Capt. Grant, of the Bombay Engineers, arrived from Cutch,—rich in a collection of fossils, rich in a local knowledge of the country, and doubly rich in his powers of graphic delineation. His treasures and memoranda were submitted to the Society, and I thought no more of mine. It appears, however, that independently of there being some few specimens in my collection from the field of Capt. Grant’s researches which he does not possess, a series of my shells comes from a territory not geologically investigated by Capt. Grant, namely, the desert N.E. of Cutch, from Balmeer and Joonah, and the plains and rivers in their neighbourhood, and proved by the specimens collected by Col. Pottinger to belong to the same series of beds as those from which Capt. Smee’s and Col. Pottinger’s specimens were obtained in Cutch. Under these circumstances it has been thought desirable to figure the new specimens from Cutch and the Desert; and the present notice may be looked upon as an appendix to my former memoranda on Capt. Smee’s fossils.






