THE extraordinary high tide which visited the coast of Norfolk on the 5th of February last, swept away considerable portions of the cliffs throughout their course on the eastern side of the county, to the no small injury of the property exposed to its attacks, and, for some weeks, afforded an unusually favourable opportunity of examining the geological phenomena of this coast. The tremendous effects produced by a sea elevated many feet above the highest level recorded, and agitated by a strong gale blowing full upon the shore, were accelerated by the remarkable wetness of the soil. So completely were the high grounds along the eastern coast previously saturated by the land springs, that daily avalanches, or "shoots" as they are provincially termed, had occurred during the winter. Many of these shoots consisted of enormous masses of clay, mud and sand, from 100 to 200 feet in thickness, which overspread the beach with their debris and prevented all passage below, except at extreme low water; and formed an inaccessible barrier, in some cases several hundred yards in depth, for some miles along the shore, between Cromer and Mundesley. The most remarkable fall occurred in the preceding month; when a portion of the Lighthouse Cliff at Cromer, at the point where it exhibits an almost perpendicular face of 250 feet, suddenly disengaged itself, and was followed by a considerable rush of water from the rear of the fallen mass. The materials of this extensive avalanche now form a promontory, occupying twelve acres, projecting many yards into the sea. As might be expected, its surface presents a rugged and shattered appearance, such as can be only compared to the effects of an earthquake. It may be here observed, that the lower portion of the fallen cliff was projected further than the upper part; a circumstance only to be explained by observing that the water having passed freely through the sand of the upper half of the cliff accumulated in considerable quantities in the rear of the tenacious blue clay of the lower half, until by its weight and pressure, added to that of the substratum, the base was forced forwards about three hundred yards from its former site.
  In consequence of the extensive denudation of the cliffs, I obtained an opportunity of examining the site of a number of fossil trees, occurring in a stratum which I had previously traced several miles; and these were particularly exposed at Cromer, both on the east and west side of the town. I was also enabled minutely to observe this singular stratum of wood during the operation of excavating the foundations of a sea wall of unusual dimensions, whereby I intersected about two hundred feet in length, and removed a great number of trees and stumps.
Thi3 subterranean forest occupies, in general, a bed about four feet in thickness, composed of numerous laminae of clay, sand, and vegetable remains; the whole mass varying much in colour and density, according to the prevalence of ferruginous or of vegetable matter. The trunks were found to stand as thickly as is usual in woods, and consistently with their proper growth. These stumps are firmly rooted in what appears the original soil on which they grew; but they are invariably broken off about a foot and a half from the base. The stems and branches lie scattered horizontally; amongst which are thin layers and cakes of decomposed leaves, but no fruits or seed-vessels were noticed. The species of timber appear to be confined chiefly to the pine tribe, with occasional specimens of elm and oak. They are all flattened by the pressure of the overlying alluvial strata.
  I am not positive of the occurrence of any animal remains, except in one instance, when I disengaged from this stratum a portion of the skull of an animal of the deer tribe. The bones of elephants and other herbivorous animals are not uncommonly found near this site, and may have been washed out of the same bed.
The general level of the stratum on which are placed the stumps of trees so far as I have traced them, is a few feet above high-water mark: although it frequently inclines as much below, and is concealed by the loose sand of the beach. At Cromer it occurs beneath 60 to 100 feet of alluvial deposits. At the base of Paston Hill the bed, containing large stumps of trees, sustains the pressure of near 200 feet of sand, gravel and clay. Nearer Happisburgh, at Bacton Gap, it occurs with only 10 feet of superincumbent loam reposing upon it. The extreme points at which I have identified this interesting stratum are about 20 miles asunder; and throughout this extent it may be considered as continuous.
The geological fact which I have taken the liberty of thus noticing is probably not altogether new, yet is entitled to some consideration, as illustrative of the former surface of this portion at least of the coast. That the stratum alluded to was the actual superficial soil, upon which grew and flourished an extensive forest of oaks and pines, and on which the deer, the elephant, and other herbivorous animals existed and died, there can be little doubt. Upon this surface, once comparatively level, have been piled irregular accumulations of alluvium, varying from 10 to 300 feet in thickness. There is no reason to doubt that the submarine forest which exists on the Norfolk coast, further northward, and which passes by the Lincolnshire coast to Yorkshire, is a continuation of the same stratum, on a somewhat lower level.
There is a striking similarity of appearance in all parts of this line. Numerous stumps of trees are perceptible at Thornham and Brancaster, standing evidently upon the original surface, whilst the trunks and branches cover the ground, in a horizontal direction. In general this wood is quite soft and decomposed, but contrary instances are not uncommon; and I have cut off fragments from the oak stumps, which though not mineralized, were so hard as almost to defy the edge of a hatchet. I cannot speak with certainty of any point in the central parts of this county where this woody stratum can be identified. Peaty valleys, with trunks of trees and stags' horns, are not unfrequent (and, among these, the Valley of Waveney is particularly to be noticed); but they probably have a different and distinct origin.

