THAT part of the coast of Northumberland of which I shall attempt to give a short account, extends from Budle Granery to Iselstone, south of Bamburgh, and is about three miles in length.
   A little west of the Granery is a trap dike or vein, about six feet wide; beyond which are alternations of lime, sandstone, and shale. In the superincumbent earth are large' angular masses of a ted limestone, containing madrepores and other organic remains.
   East of the Granery we meet with a bed of trap, which Contains small particles of iron-pyrites, calcareous spar, and quartz; About half-way between the Granery and Budle Point, a distance of about half a mile, a bed of limestone occurs, resting on the trap. The shore, extending front Budle Granery to this point, is at times covered with 4 sand of a beautiful appearance, which contains iron (attracted by the magnet), garnets and perhaps iserine.
   
     At the spot marked (4.) in the map, the rock first rises much above the level of the sand, being there about eight or ten feet in height. Here some small masses of compact felspar are imbedded in the trap. After some distance, a limestone again occurs, but under the trap, and on it a sandstone (5) ; against the south side of which the trap rests, land in some parts lies upon the grit, gradually terminating in a thin edge. The two rocks may in several places be found adhering firmly to each other. A small mass of crystalline limestone projects from under the trap near this place, and on the surface of the latter is a bed of grit, pieces of which may also be observed imbedded in that rock, and also a fragment of an impure limestone (8). The trap here gradually rises inland, forms a high hill, which is part of a range extending to Spindlestone, about two miles from the coast, where it forms lofty, picturesque cliffs, in their structure approaching the columnar: the name appears to be derived from some insulated irregular columns which project from the mass.
A bed of limestone next occurs, about two feet thick, lying on the trap. Where in contact with that rock its Appearance is very crystalline, and as it recedes from it, it gradually loses that feature. A vein of trap is here seen, generally three feet wide, cutting through the limestone; and from it run many veins, from two inches, to half an inch, and still less, in width, and many yards in length, to which the; limestone may be observed adhering.
 Near the spot marked 16, a vein of heavy-spar occurs in the limestone. At 17, a mass of fine-grained sandstone projects from the trap.
After passing some distance, over the trap, a curious appearance is seen in a basin-shaped depression: a bed of limestone about three feet thick (in which is the same gradation to a crystalline appearance, as mentioned above) rests on the trap (here containing many minute particles of iron-pyrites); on the limestone is a shale, about eighteen inches thick, containing vegetable remains; and on it another trap, approaching to columnar in its structure, about eight feet high: a vein of the Same substance connects the upper and lower beds of that rock, passing through the shale and limestone.
   Beyond this, we meet with a small imbedded mass of coarse grit (25), a portion of a thin bed of limestone lying on, and a mass of the same substance imbedded in the traps together with portions of trap, with much imbedded quartz; of impure compact felspar, and of felspar inclining to jasper.
   At  35, 86, are a bed of fine sandstone and of limestone, under the trap;
   At 37  is a clay slightly inclining to wacke, below the trap, and which appears to be part of the same bed as occurs again at 46 and 58. 39 is a bed of trap, with compact felspar, on which rests a columnar trap ; and under it is a shale and a limestone about eighteen inches thick, below which the trap occurs resting on 37.
   The section C D shews one of the most curious appearances in this tract; the columnar trap, from seven to twelve feet high, rests in part on a shale (42) about two feet thick, below which is a bed of trap (43) about one inch thick.
  From this the columnar rock descends to a limestone about four feet in thickness, and from thence to 46, a bed resembling 37, mentioned above. In one part, a vein of trap, connected with the upper columnar rock, passes through these three beds, which, near it, appear much altered.
   Leaving this spot, we pass over a thick bed of sandstone, a limestone, and a shale, all highly inclined. The latter rest on a mass of trap (apparently a vein), which terminates very suddenly; 53 is a highly indurated quartzy sandstone; between it and the basalt are veins of calcareous spar, pyrites, and heavy-spar. Passing over another bed of grit, we come to a trap, which reposes on a shale. The next bed of this rock (59) contains large nodules of iron-pyrites, very compact quartz, calcareous and pearl spar, drusy cavities lined with quartz-crystals, and crystals and veins of iron-glance, and perhaps of titanium ; and also masses of chert or splintery hornstone, of a bluish-grey colour. In this part are also some included portions of shale and limestone.
   We afterwards pass a bed of shale and of grit, and then the sand prevents any further observations, until we arrive at Bamburgh Castle, which is seated on an eminence of columnar trap. In the large square tower of this ancient building is a well, supposed to be of Roman work, sunk to the depth of 150 feet, 75 feet of which are through trap and the remainder through a freestone; The junction of the two beds is visible in several parts of the hill; they are sometimes separated by a thin bed of ruddle or iron-clay.
   The next appearance of any rock is at Iselstone, about a mile south of Bamburgh (a reef of rocks so called), where, at low-water, appears a large extent of trap, and a few yards south of it, a bed of limestone.
   This is the last appearance of this rock to the south for several miles, the next being a dike or vein at Beadnell, described in the fourth volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society.
   The next and only appearance of trap, on the coast north of Bamburgh, is at Lindisfame, or Holy Island, where it appears to be part of a dike or vein, probably connected with one which crosses the north road near Kylse, about four miles west of Holy Isle. At the latter place, near the Abbey, the trap may be seen in some parts cutting through, in others resting on, or inclosing, the limestone and shale, which, when in contact with it, are much altered in their appearance. A coarse limestone appears to crop out from below the trap, near the Castle.
   The remainder of Holy Island consists of alternations of limestone, grit, coal, and shale. The seam of coal is seventeen or eighteen inches thick, and was worked for a short time, but given up, on account of the quantity of water which oozed in from the sea: the pits were towards the north-west end of the Island. Small quantities of galena have also been found here.
   The Feme Islands, or Staples, which at high water are between twenty and thirty in number, are many of them connected at low-water (in which state they are represented in the plan) so as to form only about thirteen. They appear to consist principally of a hard coarse trap, inclining to columnar, which in some of them rises to the bright of nearly 100 feet above low-water mark. The steep rides generally face the south or south-west, and on the other 6ide they slope gradually to a level with the sea. The same observation may also be made with regard to the basaltic eminences on the opposite coast, and those more inland.
   At 74, is a mass of limestone four or five feet thick, surrounded with trap. 75, a limestone, and compact felspar. At 77, large, loose, angular blocks of felspar passing into claystone. 78, a bed of limestone, about five feet thick.
   In a vault of a tower, on thp north end of the Feme Island, is a well in the trap, now filled up with rubbish.
   Towards the north-west point a fissure proceeds some yards between two rocks, through which, in storms from that quarter, the sea is driven with great violence, and forms waves, frequently sixty feet high, known on the coast by the name of die Chum.
   Many of the appearances described in this sketch, :and represented in the plan, can only be observed at low water.


