THE country I propose to describe, comprises the northern districts of Mayo and Sligo. In constructing the map*, I have used for the former county, the excellent map of Mr. Bald, some fishery charts by Nimmo, and some local surveys; and for Sligo, a corrected copy of Larkin’s Map. In connecting the two counties, I have used triangles resulting from the operations of the Ordnance Survey, most liberally communicated by Captain Portlock, with the permission of Colonel Colby; and where doubts and deficiencies in the details occurred, observations were made with a three-inch sextant, or Rater’s Compass. The drawings (pp. 158. 162. 165. 167.) are from sketches taken on the spot, with every determination to sacrifice picturesque effect to accuracy.
  The only notice which has been published respecting this part of Connaught, is a short but very able and accurate sketch in Mr. Griffith’s paper on its Bogs, attached to the 4th Report of the Commissioners.
  The Ox mountain ridge extends through the district from south-west to north-east. It is chiefly formed of mica slate, hornblende slate, gneiss, and quartz rock, the strata dipping rapidly to the south. At the base occurs a conglomerate, alternating with sandstone and slate clay; and overlaid by the carboniferous limestone, which extends westward from Sligo to the Nefin group. This group is the commencement of the primary tract, reaching northward and westward to the ocean. The section from Lough Talt to Downpatrick Head, displays the succession of strataf.
  The Ox Mountains have a mean height of 1300 feet. On the north-west, the summits present abrupt rocky peaks; but the ravines are not of great depth, and rarely reach to the base of the chain, being gradually lost in the slope of the sides. On the south-east, the ascent is more gradual, less rocky, and streams are more numerous. The principal passes through the range, are from Colloony to Ballisadere; from Coolany to Baltra by Carrick-na-Shouock; from the barony of Liney to Skreen by Knock-a-Chree; from the same barony to Easky by Lough Eask; from Tubbercorry to Ballina by Lough Talt; and the Pontoon near Foxford.
   The first, at Colloony, is very picturesque from the magnificent falls of the river over the limestone at Colloony and Ballisadere, and the much shattered and broken mountain of mica schist, called the Union Rock, which rises through the Union Wood; as if a course had been opened for the river by some violent convulsion, the further effect of which has evidently excavated the Bay of Ballisadere, assisted by the subsidence or removal of the limestone. The rocks surrounding Glen Lough at the foot of Benbulben, indicate a similar subsidence. On the south side also of the Ox range, the soil and even the strata of limestone, have been removed, and have probably formed materials for those immense ridges of water-worn gravel, called eskers, which are found in every part of the country. Near Tubbercorry, the surface for a considerable extent, is an almost naked limestone rock, like the shore of the barony of Tyreragh, presenting the same rounded cavities in the surface, as well as the same water-worn aspect, wanting only the sea-weed and the recent shells, to complete the identity. The drainage of this district is through the pass at Colloony, by the Owenmore, which, rising from the west side of Cash Corran, receives at the Union Wood the River Arrow, and before it reaches Colloony that from Coolany, whose source is near Knock-a-Chree. The steep and rocky escarpments of the passes through which these streams flow, with the debris scattered over the surface, mark the effects of a powerful torrent. At the falls of the river, at Colloony, the limestone ceases, and thence to Ballisadere mica slate is laid bare, to a depth of fifty-five or sixty feet, lower than the limestone above the falls. The bank of the river at Coolany, about five Irish miles from the sea, is 298 feet above high-water mark, and the average descent is, therefore, 59*6 feet in the mile. The grey peak above the Union Wood and the precipices of mica slate which skirt the river below, are memorials of the ruin which has taken place; while the fragments of the same rock so abundantly strewed in large boulders on the opposite side of the estuary of Ballisadere, exhibit both the effect and the direction of the torrent, which evidently flowed from the south-west into Galway Bay, spreading thence to the north-east towards Foxford and Sligo, as indicated by the perpendicular faces and broken strata of the limestone mountains, presented to the south-west and west; by the caves in Cash Corran, perfectly resembling those into which the waters of the Atlantic rush along the coast of Erris; and especially by the direction of the ridges of limestone gravel throughout the baronies of Liney and Corran, and the southern part of Mayo.
   The second pass, Carrick-na-Shouock, derives its name from a bold and precipitous rock, which serves as a landmark to the harbour of Sligo, rising perpendicularly on three sides, and on the fourth with a very steep and difficult ascent. The road through the pass, winds over successive strata of quartz rock, gneiss, and mica slate, dipping to the south-east, and presenting to the north-west the broken edges of the beds.
   Proceeding westward, we next reach the pass of Carrow-na-Skea, which crosses the ridge below Knock-a-Chree, the highest summit of this chain (1714 feet), and on the north side descends into Tyreragh, behind Skreen hill. On both sides, the foot of the mountain is covered by a stratified quartzose conglomerate, which extends as far as the pass of Lough Talt.
   The next communication between the baronies of Liney and Tyreragh, is through the mountain valley in which lies Lough Eask, the source of the river Eask. A small patch of granite borders the road which passes along the east shore of the Lough.
   The river Moy having received, before it reaches Foxford, an accession of water from the Guishaden, as well as the lakes Conn and Cullen (about forty feet above high-water mark), passes, below the town, through the mountain chain between Carrick o’FIara and Shraheen Hill. The course of this river from its source to the Atlantic below Ballina, is about thirty Irish miles; and the descent being 300 feet from its head to high-water mark, it has a fall of ten feet in the mile, or one-sixth of that of the Colloony river ; and probably from this cause, the effects of the stream are less striking, the pass through the mountain chain being also less abrupt: the soil likewise has not been so entirely removed as at Colloony.
   Foxford stands on gneiss, from below which mica slate rises, at the hills of Shraheen and Burran on the Moy. Lough Cullen communicates with this river near the town, having received the drainage of Lough Conn, by the rocky strait at the Pontoon, where the waters have forced a passage through the beds of gneiss, leaving immense boulders scattered on the surface, even to the summit of the hills over the pass.
   It is remarkable, that throughout this district clay slate is never found either in situ or boulders.
  In the cliffs along the sea coast (see PI. XI.) the succession of strata is satisfactorily exposed. Commencing at the promontory of Tarmon in Erris, a district where primary rocks only occur, granite is quarried near Blacksod Point, and lies in beds which may indeed be called strata. The felspar is brick red, the quartz smoke grey and translucent, and the mica black: no imbedded minerals have been observed. In a small inlet on the shore, at the west end of the hill, below the Signal Tower, mica slate appears, dipping 15° to the east, and abuting against the face of the granite beds, which incline to the west 45°; and in a narrow cove, south of this inlet, the dip of the mica slate increases to 70°, its direction becoming south. Numerous veins of granite penetrate the slate, and in some instances contain fragments of it.
  Proceeding to the north-east, the coast presents only a succession of sandhills and beaches, except where a few reefs of gneiss or mica slate project into the sea. The first range of cliffs is at Annagh, the south headland of French- port, and consists of mica slate traversed by a trap dyke ; but the north headland of this inlet is formed of gneiss, composed of red felspar and black mica. On approaching Scotchport, garnets appear, the mica increases, and the felspar gradually diminishes, till the gneiss becomes mica slate, which graduates into quartz rock, in the direction of Erris Head. This formation constitutes the lofty and broken cliffs to Broad Haven, with the exception of a few places, where mica slate occurs. From Knocknalina the shore is low, consisting chiefly of peat, and the subsoil is a ferruginous clay, resting on fragments of mica slate. Near Belmullet, on the isthmus separating Broad Haven and Blacksod Bay, are vertical beds of mica slate, pierced and disturbed by the continuation of the trap dyke at Annagh. This mica slate, with many variations and transitions into gneiss, continues till it disappears beneath the clay banks of Blacksod Bay. The eastern side of Broad Haven and the mountains of Kilcommon, are also mica slate, which at Donkeehan, on the north side of the haven, presents nearly vertical strata, inclining to the north, and striking east and west. Its texture is close and fine-grained, and colour greyish yellow. The small peninsula which stretches to the south from Kil- galigan, and terminates at Rinroe Point, is formed of this rock, traversed by a trap dyke. Continuing along the coast northward, the mica slate is soon succeeded by quartz rock, a prolongation, probably, of the Erris Head strata. It underlies the mica slate, becoming nearly vertical, and continues to Porta- cloy, but varies much in its dip. At the first headland, to the east of Kid Island, a trap dyke rises from the sea, and will be hereafter described.
  Pursuing the examination of the coast to the eastward, the quartz rock continues up the narrow harbour of Portacloy, the western cliff of which is a truncated cone, connected with a narrow isthmus terminating about twenty- feet below the summit, and accessible only by steps hewn in the rock. At the west side of this headland, called Doonminulla, is a magnificent cavern, into which the sea flows through an arch about thirty feet wide and twenty- five high, the roof within, rising in a dome of above forty feet, and the length and breadth of the hall or chamber,averaging about sixty-five or seventy feet. This opening was probably produced by the disintegration of a mass of trap and the action of the waves; as arches and passages, in other parts of this coast, clearly exhibit such decomposition in progress. Between Portacloy and the next landing-place, Porturlin, a small and very narrow inlet, mica slate prevails; but across the mouth of the inlet a vein of trap passes, and is again seen in the headlands next to Benmore. From the latter point the coast continues precipitous, and is composed of mica slate or quartz rock graduating insensibly into each other. In the perpendicular face of Benwore headland, the beds diverge from a point beneath the surface of the water, like the rays of an expanded fan, probably influenced by the same dyke, which separated Horse Island from the mainland. At the east side of Balderig inlet, a bed of very compact trap is found below high-water mark, and seems to have been protruded between the strata of quartz rock, and to have proceeded from the Horse Island vein. Thence to Conoghrea there is nothing very interesting; but we there arrive at the termination of the inferior and the commencement of the intermediate order of rocks, including- the carboniferous limestone; and these beds extend without interruption to Ballyshannon in
Donegal.
   From Fohurlin to Kilcummin, west of Killalla Bay, the cliffs present strata of sandstone, occasionally containing vegetable remains, and alternating with shale and argillaceous limestone; the whole dipping regularly to the south-east, when undisturbed by the intrusion of trap veins.
   Very fantastic scenery, resembling arches, and towers, as well as caves of unusual forms, abound along this part of the coast. In some places, the sea, having penetrated the lower strata of the cliff to a considerable distance, has excavated spacious caverns, at the extremity of which a portion of the roof having fallen and been also washed away, an opening to the surface
has been formed, by means of which the waves are seen to rush with violence against the end of the cavern. One of these excavations extends across the headland of Downpatrick, a distance of about 500 yards, and in the centre, a large chasm, or, as it is locally called, a pigeon-hole, has been formed, and is 120 feet deep to the water below. Downbrista rock, which resembles an enormous, insulated, and inaccessible tower, 130 feet high, has been probably separated from the main land; as the continuation of a wall, whose remains are plainly traceable to the very edge of the cliff, stands on the summit of
the rock. The powerful surge of the Atlantic breaking on the north-west face of the headland, also 130 feet high, rises with such force and momentum as to tear up the rocks at the summit edge of the cliff, and in many instances to raise on their edges, fragments from among the debris, weighing at least half a ton. In the north-westerly gales, the spray ascends in a magnificent
column, to twice the height of the precipice against which the swell breaks, and is carried to a great distance inland.
   On the west side of Downpatrick Head, between Downbrista Rock and Buntraher Bay, the Horse Island Dyke (No. 2.) is again seen; and on doubling the head, passing eastward, another dyke, a continuation of No. 1, lies against the cliff, like an immense wall. On the sandy beach of Tracal Bay is a creek, called Poolagranny, which deserves careful examination. Proceeding around
the promontory of Kilcummin, a range of elevated and perpendicular precipices, bounds the coast as far as Poolaclogher; whence the shore is chiefly composed of gravel in waved beds, apparently much disturbed. Crossing the estuary of Palmerstown River, and following for some distance the sandy beach of Ross, the porphyry or trachyte formation, described in the 2nd section, occurs. Thence to Enniscrone, the Bay of Killalla, is bounded by the sand-banks of Bartra Island and Scurmore, to the north of which, on the Sligo shore, is a continuation of the trachyte, first seen in Ross. Prom this point to Ballisadere Bay, the coast is composed of mountain limestone and the associated beds of sandstone. These strata are strikingly displayed in the precipitous sides of Knock-na-ree, to the east of Ballisadere Bay, and are streaked horizontally with beds of light grey rock, tinged with various shades of purple and yellow; and are skirted by a talus of fragments from the cliff above.
   I have thought it convenient thus to separate the general sketch of the district, from those geological details, which are the more immediate object of this communication.
SECOND SECTION.
   In considering the subject of this section, I adopt the arrangement of the Rev. William Conybeare, in his Outlines of the Geology of England. Commencing, therefore, with the highest formation in the district, the following series will be described :
Intermediate order
The inferior or primary rocks ..
'A. Carboniferous limestone.
A. Ditto oolitic.
* C. Calcareous and argillaceous shale and grit underlying the limestone.
- D. Old red sandstone and conglomerate.
{
E. Quartz rock.
F. Gneiss.
G. Mica slate and hornblende slate.
H. Granite.
I. Trap rocks, porphyry, and basalt.
K. Trachyte.
INTERMEDIATE ORDER.
A. Carboniferous Limestone.
   This formation prevails on the north and south of the Ox Mountains. Ben- bulberi (1697 feet) and Knock na Ree (1057) on the north of the chain; and Knock na Shee (480) on the south, are entirely formed of it. The lower beds contain nodules of black chert, and invest the organic remains which abound in limestone throughout Ireland. It varies in texture from compact to highly crystalline, and in colour from grey to light brown; its specific gravity ranging from 2-670 to 2-685. Arragonite, fluor, brown spar, pyrites, and quartz crystals are often imbedded in it, or line rifts and fissures. A vein of sulphuret of lead accompanied by blende and iron pyrites, has been worked at Ballisadere, but is now abandoned. It is said to have been very rich in silver. About eighty years since, another lead mine was wrought at Lug- gawarry, on the north face of the Ox Mountains, near the pass of Carrick na Shouock. The level and some shafts are still open, and the ore was found near the junction of the limestone with the subjacent rocks. Organic remains abound in the formation, some occurring in it exclusively, as far as I have examined the midland parts of Ireland. Among these, polyparia are prominent, especially a gigantic species of Cyathophyllum; and among the shells I have seen two specimens of a very large Euomphalus, armed with formidable spines*, also many species of Productus, Spirifer, and Tere- bratula. In the Hill of Skreen, among the lower beds of this rock, near the junction with the subjacent conglomerates, are some thin strata containing numerous quartz pebbles cemented by limestone; and beneath these are layers containing shells, but no quartz pebbles. In the neighbourhood of Killalla is the following peculiar formation, which I have not observed elsewhere. It is interposed between the limestone and the older sandstones.
B. Oolite of the Carboniferous Limestone.
  This deposit, which lies below the limestone from Moyne to Rathrea, varies in colour from iron grey to dark smoke grey; and is composed of granular concretions not larger than mustard-seeds, but, under the microscope, appear to consist of concentric laminae. Its durability as a building material, is proved by the ruined abbey at Moyne, the arches, pillars, and smallest mouldings of which, retain the most delicate touches of the chisel. Marine exuviae occur in this rock, but so comminuted that the genera are scarcely determinable. It contains also, though rarely, carbonized and pyritous, vegetable remains, resembling reeds and the leaves of the Iris; also nodules of black shale containing particles of pitch coal. Sometimes cavities occur, lined with arragonite, in fibrous radiated concretions. The beds are frequently separated by layers of brownish slate clay, varying in thickness, and interspersed with fragments of black slate clay, not at all water-worn. This oolite, as already stated, is very limited in extent, being found only from Moyne by Killalla to Rathrea. In some parts of the county of Sligo, the lower beds of the carboniferous limestone are highly crystalline, and much resemble this rock; but a magnifier immediately detects the absence of the spherical concretions.
  At the outcrop of this deposit along the shore, between Killalla and the Abbey of Moyne, is a breccia composed of angular fragments of oolite, imbedded in an argillaceous cement. It occupies the spaces between large masses of the same rock, thrown confusedly together. The edges of the beds are elevated and much fractured, while their recurrence to the north, to which point they rise, indicates a subsidence or fault ranging east and west. The beds of peat and bog-timber, found below high-water mark in Killalla Harbour, may be connected with the fault. Near this place the sandstone emerges from beneath the oolite in rude columnar masses, much disturbed, and forms the commencement of the grit and shale beds described under the next head.
C. Calcareous and Argillaceous Shale and Grit.
   The mountain limestone rests on alternating layers of sandstone, slate clay, and argillaceous limestone, except where the oolitic strata intervene ; and the lower beds of grit, graduate, in some places, so insensibly into the subjacent quartz rock, that the limits of the two formations are very difficult to determine. At the western boundary the transition is gradual, and were it not that the strata of quartz rock at Glen Lassera, are unconformable to the beds of sandstone, the demarkation could scarcely be ascertained. The conglomerate of the old red sandstone is also absent there; but along the foot of the Ox Mountains, it is interposed between the grit and shale beds and the older strata. To detail the succession of layers is impossible, but two examples, taken from Ross and Moyne, may be instructive; and Mr. Griffith’s Memoir on Mayo, in the Reports of the Bog Commissioners, made in 1814, furnishes the details at Balhorig in Erris.
   There is a striking resemblance between these grit and shale beds, and those which accompany coal; but they lie decidedly below the great limestone, over which all the Connaught coal district is placed. Their total thickness may be estimated at 1700 or 1800 feet.
   The most instructive sections are exposed along the coast from Ross, near Killalla, to Port Conoghrea, where the quartz rock is first seen. In many quarries, the surface of the grit beds exactly resembles a sandy beach deserted by the tide, presenting the same waved, ripple marks.
   Beneath the varied succession of strata, which underlie the carboniferous limestone, is generally found the D. The Old Red Sandstone and Conglomerate.
  This rock occurs uniformly along- the base of the Ox Mountains, both on the north and south declivity; but, at the shore on the confines of Erris, where the intermediate and primary strata join, it has perhaps either never existed, from the absence of the causes which influenced its deposition elsewhere, or it has become identified with the lower portion of the grit, by a change in the grain and texture. In general, the strata are very distinct, though composed of large pebbles of quartz, jasper, and primary schists imbedded in a tenacious cement. The argillaceous soil formed by the decomposition of the matrix of the conglomerate, is stiff, cold, and sterile. I have not observed any organic remains. The conglomerate graduates, in many places, insensibly into the subjacent quartz rock, especially on the south declivity of the Ox Chain, where the two formations lie conformably on the inferior strata; but on the northern slope, the conglomerate rests on the edges, or outcrop of the older beds. This position may be very distinctly seen at the foot of Knock-a-Chree, above Drimnagoole, where the mica slate dips to the south, to which point the beds of old red sandstone rise, lying unconformably on the edges of the schist, and followed by the grit, shale and carboniferous limestone, in regular and parallel succession. In Glen Co, on the banks of the Owenmore River, in Erris, this rock emerges from under the series described by Mr. Griffith, and lies on the quartz rock, which prevails to Bangor. The hill of Addergool on Lough Conn, and Glen Nefin, on the flanks of the Barnagee Mountains (a prolongation to the south-west of
the Ox Chain), are old red sandstone, in regular beds, though remarkably coarse, being formed of rolled pebbles of unusual dimensions. The thick beds of peat which generally cover the declivity of the mountains, preventing an exact knowledge of the boundaries of the rocks, the demarkations can be ascertained only in the ravines, where the streams have removed the bog,
soil, and decomposed strata.
THE INFERIOR OR PRIMARY ROCKS.
E. Quartz Rock.
   This formation overlies the gneiss in many places along the south declivity of the Ox Mountains. It is generally composed of very fine, white, quartz grains, firmly compacted, and free from extraneous mixture; and it is laminar or schistose in structure. This may be considered the purest variety, and of such Nefin in Tyrawly, 2639 feet high, consists; also the vertical beds in the
headlands, east and west of Broad Haven. In other places it is mingled with white, compact felspar, the laminae being thicker and less regular ; and mica also enters into the compound, which then graduates into gneiss. Rising from below the old red sandstone, on the banks of the Ovvenmore, in Erris, it prevails around Bangor and the south shore of Carromore Lake; but on the east bank mica slate appears. The northern part of the Mullet is also quartz rock ; and in a perpendicular cliff, at a place called Mycreeny, between Blind Harbour and Erris Head, are several very interesting and perplexing,shifted quartz veins. (See the following sketch, No. I.)
No. 1.

   The derangements represented in the sketch might have resulted from repeated slips of the strata in varying directions; suppose (see diagram No. 2.) the aggregate of beds marked A 1, 2, 3, 4, to have slid together in the direction E E, the interruption at C would be the result; after which a series of successive slips of the individual beds A 1, 2, 3, 4, in the altered direction F F, parallel to the vein C C but oblique to D D, would displace the latter in each bed, as represented in the plan ; while G G, in consequence of its position, so much inclined to the planes of those strata, would be differently affected, and the breaks in its continuity might be scarcely perceptible.
No. 2.
  A great part of the coast from Broad Haven to Glen Lassera consists of quartz rock, varying considerably in dip and direction. East of Broad Haven, from Kilgaligan to Kid Island, the beds are nearly vertical, and of pure white, granular quartz, in which I saw no vestige of imbedded minerals. At Sheea- nemore, between Porturlin and Balderig, is a remarkable slip, the western portion of the cliff being depressed about 300 feet. At Glen Lassera this formation disappears beneath the intermediate rocks, and recurs no more along the coast to the eastward.
F. Gneiss.
  This rock is well characterized at the Pontoon Bridge between Lough Conn and Lough Cullen ; also at many places in the peninsula of Erris, and in the mountains at Mulli na Shee above Coolany ; but sometimes it graduates into mica slate. At the Pontoon the mica is black, and the foliated structure is strikingly displayed; while the occurrence of imbedded crystals of red felspar, gives a porphyritic character to the rock. The beds dip from 10° to 45°, and 60°, to the south-west, the prevalent direction throughout the Ox Chain.
  * The explanation offered in the text accords with that proposed by the late M. Schmidt, to account for the phenomena of veins having been apparently shifted in opposite directions, without any intermediate break (1 C. D 1, Exposed Section, and wood-cut No. 1.); and depends upon the strike of the veins not being parallel (C C and D D of Plan). In the above case, at My- creeny, the movements are supposed to have been in the direction of the arrows, or towards the front of the cliff (No. 1. wood-cut) ; and the upper or shifted portions to have been removed.

  In Erris, behind the vicarage at Tarmoncarra, the rock is well exposed in the cliffs. The strata range north-west and south-east, and though when considered generally, the gneiss appears to lie above the mica slate, and below the quartz rock, yet when examined in detail, frequent alternations and transitions are observable, even in the space of a few perches; so that it is only from an inspection of the whole deposit, its nature and character can be determined. For instance, at Annagh, the south headland of Port-na-Frankagh (French Port), mica predominates, and the gneiss approaches in aspect to mica slate, while the north point presents gneiss, distinctly marked, abounding in red felspar, with black mica; and more northward, near Scotch Port, it is studded with garnets, and the mica coalesces into small feathery crystals, while the felspar has diminished into fine grains, detectable only by a magnifier. Proceeding along the shore, hornblende gradually becomes a component, and even occasionally the predominant ingredient, and sometimes the mica slate contains crystals of sahlite. Between Scotch Port and Donamoe is, however, a sudden change. A narrow fault or fissure, scarcely a foot wide, filled with a clayey breccia, apparently derived from the detritus of hornblende and gneiss, and ranging in an easterly direction, cuts through all these beds, having on the south the hornblende schist, and on the north, mica slate, perfectly distinct, and containing those peculiar plumose concretions of mica, alluded to above. From this sudden variation, we may conclude, that an elevation has taken place at the north side of the fault, produced, probably, by the same operation which erupted the dykes parallel to it; and that the mica slate and gneiss of Port-na-Frankagh, or French Port, are here forced up to the surface; the coast rising once more into mica slate cliffs, in which the mica again diminishing and the felspar reappearing, the rock passes into gneiss. Oxydulous iron in laminae is met with here, accompanied by druses of felspar crystallized in oblique rhomboidal prisms. From this point mica again predominates, and Donamoe consists of mica slate. Proceeding to the northward, the mica and the felspar decrease gradually, and the beds pass into quartz rock, which, towards Erris Head, as already detailed, exclusively constitutes the sea cliffs. In the eastern part of the district, at Mulli-na-Shee, below7 which the road from Coolany to Tyreragh passes, the same transition from quartz rock to mica slate is seen, the latter containing an unusual ingredient, in small crystals of asbestos disseminated through the mass, and accompanied by minute prisms of felspar; schorl and calcareous spar also sometimes occur. The beds under these abound with garnets. The entire series, from the conglomerate to the mica slate, dips about 15° or 20° to the south-east, which is the general inclination of the strata in the Ox Mountains.

G. Mica Slate and Hornblende Slate. H. Granite.
   Mica slate and its subordinate strata constitute the prevailing rocks in the Ox Chain and Erris Mountains. At the sea shore below the western declivity of the hill of Tarmon, which forms the southern point of Mullet, the slate is penetrated by granite veins. An instructive example of this interference appears in a small cove, about four yards wide, near a point called Toneadoon. At a bifurcation of the vein, a small detached fragment of mica schist, is entangled in the granite, the laminae being in a direction different from those of the surrounding schist. The vein is seen at both sides of the inlet, and it has rendered the schist looser in its texture, as well as somewhat friable; the laminated structure also is partially obliterated, and the mica is replaced by a mineral resembling hornblende. This change takes place gradually in the neighbourhood of the vein, which is highly crystalline, the felspar being in large rhomboidal crystals of a flesh red. The granite is laminated, the mica is greenish white, and the quartz nearly translucent; and the layers are parallel to the sides of the fissure, but coarser and larger in the middle.
   It is evident, the rock has been disturbed subsequently to the formation of these veins, as a vertical slip has almost broken their continuity near the extremity next toTarmon Hill. The mica slate there dips 70° to the south, and appears to have been shifted about half the breadth of the vein. It contains also veins of quartz, sometimes four feet wide. The junction of this rock with the granite, can also be examined at an inlet north of the signal tower, the mica slate dipping 15° to the east, and the edges of the beds abutting unconformably against the mass of granite. At Doonaniron, north of Broadhaven, the quartz rock dips 60° to the south, and upon it the mica schist lies conformably, but distinctly separated; the quartz beds being unusually pure and unmixed with extraneous matter, and the schist abounding remarkably in mica. Mica slate prevails through the district south of Kilcommon, as far as the banks of the Owenmore; and continuing thence to the river Munneen, the boundary probably ranges by the foot of Corslieve, Nefin, Knock-na-Ree, and Shraheen Mountains, to the Ox Range, where, in the gap of Lough Talt, beds of the schist approach in composition hornblende rock. But this is merely a local variety. Above Lough Eask garnets abound, and pinite sometimes occurs ; and to the eastward asbestos is found.
   On the north coast, mica slate forms the eastern cliff at the entrance of Portacloy, where the beds are most capriciously contorted by the influence of the first dyke; and it extends to Porturlin, but is there succeeded by quartz rock, which prevails to Benmore. At this point mica slate reappears, rifted and disturbed by the intrusion of trap, which rises perpendicularly from the sea two thirds of the height of the cliffs, and then turns off for a short distance in conformable stratification. At Balderig Inlet the mica slate disappears, recurring no more on the coast.
  The inferior rocks, granite, gneiss, mica slate, and quartz, just described, frequently graduate so insensibly into each other, that the observer is inclined to allow them a common origin, modified only by variations in the proportions of the ingredients of which they consist; for instance the Erris granite in most instances passes into gneiss, the gneiss into mica slate, and this into quartz rock. Below the signal tower of Tarmon, veins of that granite, however, pierce the mica slate, producing decided and obvious proofs of protrusion and derangement, and at the exposed junction of these rocks the mica slate is unconformable in stratification, the edges of its layers abutting against the inclined face of the granite.
I. The Trap Rocks, Porphyry, and Basalt.
  These are the most interesting and remarkable rocks of the district. They form dykes, unexampled, I believe, for length, directness, and parallelism, and for their varied effects on the adjacent strata*. Their strike is nearly east and west, differing only 4° or 5° to the north of west. I commence their description with the most northerly, which may be distinguished as No. 1.; and proceed with my details in a direction from west to east.
No. 3.
Strata of mica slate bent over projecting masses of trap at Attatovick Point.
     No. 1. This dyke emerges from the sea at Benwee Head, in Erris, where it has occasioned a slip in the cliff; and the laminae of the quartz rock are much curved and disturbed. A cavern passing through a point of the headland, and practicable by boats in calm weather only, has been formed by the decay of a portion of the dyke. Opposite the rock called Calliagh, a branch of the dyke appears as a mass of trap, enveloped in curved laminae of the including rock. Further eastward, at Doonminulla, its disintegration has produced two caves, near which the strata are highly inclined, and the trap is conformably interleaved. Crossing thence the inlet of Portacloy, it rises vertically through the point of Attatovick, the strata of which are heaved up and bent over projecting portions of trap, like doubled folds of cloth, in the manner represented in the cut No. 3. From this point it passes under the sea to Pig Island, which it penetrates, presenting in the lower part, a pervious cavern, formed by its decay, and in the upper the appearance of a wall regularly built from shore to shore. This dyke does not intersect the coast again till it passes through Downpatrick Head, where it resembles a massive facing of polygonal prisms, raised against the cliff on each side of the point. I have not traced it further.
   No. 2. The next dyke, to the southward, first appears in an inlet called Preeson, near Kid Island, traversing the quartz rock vertically for one fourth of its height, and then turning off horizontally in waved and irregular veins to the north and south, seems to have lifted the strata and penetrated between them. At Porturlin inlet, it forms a regular wall, piercing the precipice on the west side from the water’s edge to the summit, and so closely resembles a fence of masonry, that a careless observer might be deceived. Crossing the entrance of the creek, and traversing the eastern point, it passes beneath the sea to Benmore Head, where it rises in the face of the cliff to half its height, and then ranges horizontally for some distance, terminating at last in a wedge. It appears also in the channel which separates Horse Island from the mainland, and can be most satisfactorily examined at low water, leaning against the quartz rock at the east end of the strait. A cave is there pervious to some distance, the roof presenting a very acutely pointed arch, and the passage between the Island and the main resulted probably, from the disintegration of the strata, altered by the trap. A vertical cross vein of wacke intersects it at an angle of 70°, having at the west side a thick wall of white quartz, in many places tinged green with oxide of copper, and a few yards from this cross vein, are two small parallel dykes of trap, containing zeolite. The stratification of the island is very much disturbed, and the derangement extends to the mainland, where the strata, in the next point in Balderig inlet, are elevated at an angle increasing from 70° next the sea, to 90°. On the eastern side, this dyke inclines to the south, underlying the strata of quartz rock, with which it would appear to be interstratified, and a prolongation has been thrown out in the form of a dyke, but it cannot be traced far.
   The very extraordinary channel separating Illaan Maister from the extremity of Benmore Head, has been produced also by the removal of a branch of this dyke ; its disintegration having left a chasm barely sufficient for a boat to row between its perpendicular and perfectly plane walls, 700 feet high. This pass is nearly dark in the middle, but of great grandeur and singularity, and accessible only in the calmest weather.
   In the cliffs to the west of Horse Island are many fantastic and inexplicable appearances. The dyke, rising through the beds of rock, cuts them obliquely, and sends out, at one side, a regular stratum lying conformably between the layers of quartz rock. Near this, a mass of trap, incumbent on the edges of the quartz strata, which are perpendicular, penetrates between them like a series of wedges;—the vertical layers of rock, at one side of an upright vein of trap, are perfectly regular and parallel, while at the other side they are much waved and contorted;—masses of the whin also occur, imbedded in undisturbed and regularly stratified rock, without an appearance of fracture, though of the most extraordinary shapes.
   At Port Conoghrea the intermediate rocks commence, but their inclination and position are much disturbed by the vein, which passes thence to the south of Downpatrick Head; where it is seen to great advantage, forming an immense wall which lines the cliff from the water’s edge, and is constituted of polygonal prisms closely fitted, transversly across the dyke, their ends forming the face of the wall. On the west (east?) side of the headland it is cut through by a cross vein of coarser trap, ranging north-west; but apparently no changes have been produced by this interference. On the east shore of KillallaBay, the dyke is again found near the point of Kenisharrock, and afterwards in the cliff at Killeenduff, rising vertically from the water’s edge. Further east it appears at both sides of Aghris Head, and proceeds to the sandbanks of Strandhill, which probably cover it. I have not sought it further.
   The course thus detailed is forty-five English miles; and to view the dyke satisfactorily, at least half this distance must be passed in a boat, as closely as possible beneath the cliffs.
   No. 3. Parallel to No. 2, and about two miles to the south, the third dyke emerges from the sea, near the south end of Rinroe Point, in Broad Haven, and extends by the foot of Knock-na-Ree, north of Ballisadere Bay, to Dromahair, in the county Leitrim (and probably further), a distance of about sixty-five English miles, while its breadth seldom exceeds forty feet. At Rinroe, the adjacent mica slate is considerably altered, all schistose structure having been obliterated, and the rock rendered loose and easily broken into irregularly angular fragments. It rises like a mole or pier from the water’s edge, and this resemblance is rendered more striking, by the contiguous schist having yielded to the surge for some feet at each side, leaving a narrow and deep channel, up which the sea rushes. At forty yards distance is a parallel vein, but much smaller. Both veins cross the harbour, and appear on the east side at the water’s edge.
   These dykes have been traced across Ballinglan, and at Poolagranny, near Kilcummin Head, they are beautifully displayed, the northern being ten feet wide, and the southern about twenty. Passing through the alternating strata of sandstone, slate clay, and coarse limestone, they have given the shale a conchoidal fracture, prismatic structure, and black colour, in short converted it into flinty slate; the sandstone has been altered also, being partially translucent, much rifted, and in prismatic masses at the point of junction. These changes having rendered the strata exceedingly destructible, the surge has broken them up in the neighbourhood of the trap, and the dykes remain like ramparts of cyclopean masonry. At the east side of the creek, the beds of shale or slate clay mouldering away, have formed a cave or recess of some depth, bounded on one side by the trap vein, and on the other by the less decayed strata ; the roof and sides of the cavity being covered by calcareous tufa, which frequently accompanies, and indeed often indicates the presence of trap. Over the entrance, a constant dropping of water has formed a sort of curtain or screen. The trap is here of a very coarse grain, and blackish green colour, the basis seems to be hornblende, with a sparing mixture of felspar, and is thickly studded with zeolite, in spherical concretions, and sometimes contains small nodules of green earth.
   The passage of these trap dykes through both inferior and intermediate rocks, proves, that the fissures which they fill, could not have resulted from the contraction of the strata in drying or consolidating ; the same cause having divided the quartz rock and mica slate, which, according to this theory, must have been firm and solid before the deposition of the shale, sandstone, and calcareous beds. In the banks which rise over the creek of Poolagranny, the upper beds of sandstone are much curved, with joints open above, in the convex part of the curve, and below where it is concave, while the beds beneath remain horizontal. This derangement, therefore, can have resulted only from a lateral pressure forcing the layers of stone horizontally, but acting superficially. Such is the appearance exhibited in the hill north of Poolaclogher, on the east of Kilcummin headland, especially at a point near the landing place, represented in the accompanying wood-cut, No. 4.
No. 4.
Contorted strata of shale and grit north of Poolaclogher.
   At Poolaheny, on the east side of Killalla Bay, the course of this dyke is often obscured drifting of a shingle-beach, but it is found to the east of the mouth of the Dromore River, coast of Tyreragh, preserving the same characters, and influencing the adjacent rock in the same manner. Thence, holding its direct course to the south-west of Aghris Head, and rising from the
water through the beds of rock covered at high tide, it is seen for about 200 yards, but on reaching the shore, the sand banks and soil prevent further observation; and the dyke is concealed to the picturesque chasm, called the Glen, produced by it in the side of Knock-na-Ree.
   The soil and the fallen rocks which have been thrown together and levelled to form a walk through “ the Glen,” obscure the trap except at a few points, where it may be examined satisfactorily. To judge from the present appearance of the rift, it was never filled to the brink with trap; as the sides would close together with scarcely any void, the projections of one face coinciding accurately with the recesses of the other. I have next observed this dyke below the village of Dromahair, in the county Leitrim, running parallel to the river, which falls into the east end of Lough Gill; and here an unusual change occurs, the material of the vein consisting of vertical layers of serpentine. The mica slate, when in contact with the vein, presents a bright red colour, and crumbles between the fingers, as if it had been intensely heated; and veins of asbestos occur abundantly in the dyke between the coarse laminae which compose it. The schist rises towards the vein at each side, as if it had been elevated by a force from below, and the serpentine forms a narrow line of hill along the river, where its stream turns to the eastward, opposite Friarstown, about half a mile from the town. I have not traced it further, but there is no appearance of a termination.
   No. 4. This dyke is found in the west side of Erris Head, where a pigeon hole (as those caverns in the cliffs, with an opening in the roof are called) has resulted from its disintegration. It appears again at the opposite side, rising from the water’s edge to the summit of the precipice; and it crosses Broad Haven, but the drifting sands at the mouth of the Glanamoy River conceal its course, as do the bog and moor to the valley of Ballinglan. At the last locality, the shale and grit beds are much deranged by its influence, the shale being indurated and converted into a black quartzy chert, rifted most irregularly, and the crevices are filled with quartz, highly crystalline, and shooting into hexagonal pyramids; and the layers of grit are disturbed and fissured. It is prolonged thence to Kilcummin, appearing in the road on the west side; and traversing the head it is seen among the rocks on the sea shore, near Castlemagee. It is there por- phyritic, being chiefly composed of large tabular concretions of felspar, and contains augit and green earth. On the east shore of Killalla Bay, it passes through the limestone, and may be observed further east, at Conquil Bridge, and is well displayed at Dromore West, having there raised up the limestone at each side, altered the colour, and rendered the structure more granular. It constitutes the fall in the river close to the bridge; beyond which the stream runs in a deep ravine, caused by the decomposition of the limestone, but the dyke lines one side of the bank some distance below. It has been observed by Mr. J. Wynne, of Hazlewood, at Dromiskeybole, near the west end of Lough Gill; and in the pass through Slish Mountain, close to the Ballintogher road, it either sends a branch to the north-west, or is crossed by another dyke. I have, as yet, been unable to determine this point, but a ridge of serpentine is found there, near and parallel to the road, for the repair of which it furnishes the material. There is almost an identity between specimens from this site and those from the Dromahair dyke; they are both laminated, both contain asbestos, and agree in colour and hardness. My examination terminated here.
   No. 5. This dyke first appears as a singular and picturesque narrow stair-case of prisms, ascending from the sea between two high walls of indurated mica slate, almost porcelainised by its contact, and the schistose structure is obliterated. The steps consist of short columns, lying horizontally across the vein, from side to side. Penetrating the peninsula of Erris, and crossing, eastward of Broad Haven, the district of Kilcommon, the peat and soil conceal its course, till it appears in Ballinglan, where it can be traced up a ravine through which a stream flows from the moory summit of Knock Aghleeg ; and on the east side of that hill, it crosses the stream of Carrickanass, traversing the beds of sandstone without any apparent effect. It continues thence by Rafron and Ross to the Bay of Killalla, passing for some distance through the bed of trachyte, where it assumes the appearance of basalt, black, fine-grained and prismatic, in one place regularly columnar, and the pillars are as neatly defined as those of the Giants’ Causeway, but their axes are nearly horizontal, being at right angles to the walls of the vein. In Palmerstown River it appears like three walls of polygonal prisms, built in contact with each other; and the surrounding rock having been decomposed and washed away, its construction is laid open. The prisms where weathered, peel off easily in concentric layers, but they increase in hardness as the interior is approached, where they are extremely tough and refractory.
   The appearance of this fifth dyke, on the east shore of Killalla Bay, is attended with peculiar and instructive circumstances (see the accompanying wood-cut, No. 5.). Rising through the carboniferous limestone, it destroys the colour as usual, but about four feet from the surface the limestone strata above the dyke are much shaken and disturbed, and the trap has turned off laterally beneath this disturbed mass, and divided into small nodules, cemented together by calcareous spar, thus forming a conglomerate. A careful examination has convinced me that the trap, on reaching the point where its ascent ceased, became mingled with fused limestone, the carbonic acid of which was separating abundantly from the diminution of pressure. The conglomerate could not have been produced by infiltration, because the cement occupies more space than the nodules enveloped by it, which are not in contact. The further course of this dyke has not been observed.
No. 5.
Trap dyke in carboniferous limestone east side of Killalla Bay.
   No. 6, the next dyke in succession, commences at the sea, near the vicarage of Tarmoncarra, in Erris, and has caused one of those caverns, called Pigeon-holes. From its direction, this dyke may probably be identified with that which appears opposite to the mill of Tully, above the bridge, on the Palmerstown river, penetrating the sandstone strata, a few yards from their junction with the overlying limestone; and is seen again at the coast guard boat harbour at Enniscrone, on the east side of Killalla Bay. It is there twenty feet wide, and has rendered the limestone white and compact for several yards at each side, but the calcareous strata gradually resume their usual dark grey colour. I have not searched for the continuation of this vein.
   No. 7. dyke begins in mica slate at Annagh in Erris, and crosses to BelMullet,whereitisfound on the shore a little north of the town. It reappears in the new road to Ballinglan, south-west of Killalla Bay, and afterwards in the inlet below Moyne Abbey, where are five parallel branches which have produced much derangement in the rock, and apparently contributed to the subsidence in the neighbourhood of Killalla, from the mouth of the river Moy to the bridge at Pal- merstown. The abrupt fa9ade of oolitic limestone, from near Moyne by Kilroe to Castlerea, appears to be a portion of the undisturbed stratum, while the broken and sunken beds of rock which skirt the shore, and the depression which is covered by the tide within the Island ofBartra, seem the result of a subsidence. One of the veins of trap below Moyne differs in composition, containing calcareous spar and olivin, and breaking with a compact fracture, whiie the others are externally decomposed, very friable, and abound with small concretions of zeolite.
   No. 8. The point where this dyke might probably first be seen in Erris, is covered by drift sand, but on the south shore of Broad Haven, below the road near Derracorib, it has tilted the st-ata into a vertical position. It is well seen near the Glebe House at Mullafarry, south of Killalla Bay, where it consists of concentrically foliated spheroids, weathering in successive coats, and surrounding a very tough, crystalline nucleus. The limestone, as usual, is white, friable, and earthy near the dyke. This vein was exposed near Annaghmore, during an alteration in the road at Ardcree Bridge. Its possible range further east will be alluded to hereafter.
   No. 9. dyke is seen near Ballybroony, south of Killalla Bay, and crossing the Moy, traverses the glebe land of Killanly. The limestone is converted by the dyke into a calcareous breccia of angular fragments cemented by calcareous spar, as if beat had rifted and cracked the rock, among the fragments of which, fused limestone had been then injected.
   No 10. crosses the valley of Glencastle in Erris, near the eastern end of the bridge, the parapet of which abuts on the vein. It penetrates the mica slate, and the beds are much waved and contorted as the dyke is approached; but at the meeting of the trap and schist, the latter is decomposed to a ferruginous clay: the dip also is altered from about 45° north-west to 80° north. It contains quartz veins abundantly. It is seen again along the side of the road near Netley Park, and crosses the river Moy near Bunree, the marl or calcareous tuff indicating its presence ; it is also visible in the mail-coach road to Dromore.
   No. 11. This dyke traverses the peninsula of Erris, appearing on both the west and east shores, and produces considerable alteration in the hornblende rock at Learn, which is rendered so nearly identical with the trap, that it is difficult to distinguish the exact boundary. A dyke is seen on the right bank of the Moy, about a mile from Ballina, on the road to Dromore, and probably is the continuation of this.
   I have not sought for dykes to the southward of Ballina, but I think it very likely that many may be found; I have heard that one is visible near Castlebar.
K. The Trachyte Formation.
   1 have not seen any notice of the occurrence of this rock in the British Islands ; but the use of the term has been sanctioned by the authority of Mr. Poulett Scrope, as applied to the formation in question; and I take this opportunity of acknowledging the kind aid of his opinion. It is found in Ross, north of Killalla. On tracing the coast southward from the mouth of Palmerstown River, a bold sandstone rock rises suddenly from the beach in irregular but level strata, which, however, soon dip to the south in a confused and fractured state, and are followed by a mass of trachyte composed of glassy felspar in irregularly quadrangular tables, mingled with black augit in laminar concrelions, the plates of which are generally parallel, reflecting the light at the same angle over the surface of the specimen. Quartz in hexagonal pyramids also occurs, as well as green earth, lepidolite, and different zeolites. Near the middle of the mass, which is about 1100 yards wide, the felspar becomes opaque, yellowish grey, and regularly crystallized in rectangular prisms, the augite diminishing in quantity, and the zeolites and quartz increasing; but on approaching the southern boundary the augite predominates, and the felspar resumes its transparency and greyish colour. Near the limits of the mass, changes gradually take place, the grain becoming closer, and the crystals diminishing in size, till the trachyte can scarcely be distinguished from the sandstone. The latter rock also becomes more compact and harder at the junction, while the shale passes into Lydian stone, and the stratification is much deranged, the dip being towards the trachyte on both the north and south limits. A small dyke or vein is seen at the southern part of this bed, having nearly an east direction. A few yards from the point where it emerges from the bank, it is broken across and discontinued, but about three feet to the south, occurs again in the same direction. This lateral shift or removal, is twice repeated before it reaches low-water mark, and suggests the idea of successive horizontal slips having taken place, from the north, after the consolidation of this vein and the including rock. The trachyte is continued across the lands of Ross to the Palmerstown River, where it forms the bank for some distance, and its junction with the sandstone is well displayed under the old church of Templemary on the opposite shore. Having been protruded laterally, it lies above, and at the plane of contact a substance is interposed resembling fine clay slate, except in the lamellar structure. Could this intervening layer have proceeded from fusion of the sandstone alone, or from its component parts mingling with those of the liquid trachyte in the proportions which form clay slate? Analysis might determine the question. Augite here predominates, and the rock graduates into a coarse basalt in jointed columns. Ascending to the cross-roads at Mullinacrush, the bed approaches more to porphyry, being almost entirely composed of glassy felspar in thin tabular crystals laterally compacted together, and in detached portions presenting a schistose aspect, but in the mass rising in blocks like granite, without any approach to stratification. It contains very sparingly, zeolite, chalcedony, iron pyrites, and augite. It occupies the summit of the hill, not, however, extending far to the westward. On the opposite shore of Killalla Bay, I found the trachyte on the lands of Cahirvove, bounded by limestone, upon which it appears to lie; but no seam divides the two rocks, which are mingled irregularly at their junction, the limestone containing both felspar and augite. At this side the character of the bed differs slightly from that of Ross, being more varied in structure, and might be applied to ornamental purposes, if not too hard to be wrought satisfactorily. The felspar, which occurs abundantly at Ross, presents unusual varieties in the crystallization. The crystals appear to be rectangular prisms, having the terminal angles replaced by triangular planes; but on close inspection they are found to consist of two or four prisms attached laterally. Striae may be seen with a magnifier on the planes parallel to the edges of that replacing the angle of the prism ; and as these striae diverge from the line of junction, the crystal has a feathered appearance, as represented in the wood-cuts. The conditions under which the complicated arrangement of the ultimate particles, and of the simple and compound crystals were effected, apparently indicate perfect tranquillity, complete fusion, and very slow cool-
ing of the mass. This conjecture is supported by the fact, that the most perfect crystals are found about the centre of the bed, the part which would longest retain its heat and fluidity.
  The occurrence of trachyte (a formation hitherto unobserved in the British Islands) at the shores of the bay of Killalla, is an interesting discovery. Of the period when the rock was formed, it can only be said with certainty, that it is newer than the mountain limestone, and older than the system of trap dykes, as it lies on the former, and is penetrated by No. 5, one of the latter.


