I AM not aware that the sand of Bagshot Heath has yet been described with such attention to detail, and reference to localities, as will enable an inquirer to form a correct opinion concerning its geological character. Mr. Smith indeed is stated, in Mr. Farey's Survey of Derbyshire, to have ascertained that it is the highest known stratum in England, and that it rests upon the clay of London; but no proofs of this statement are there given, and I do not find a repetition of it in the memoir that accompanies Mr. Smith's geological map; nor is the map coloured in conformity with this opinion.
Concerning the Bagshot sand it may be asked, whether, like the gravel about London, it consists of diluvian debris, or whether it belongs to a regular stratum, like the sands of the plastic clay? and admitting it to belong to a regular stratum, it will be a question to what position we shall refer it among the beds superior to the chalk.
The sand of Bagshot Heath occupies a district extending from east to west, along the axis of that great depression in the chalk which has been called the London Basin. The length of this district, from its eastern extremity at Esher in the county of Surry to its western extremity at Bromshill Common on the confines of Berkshire and Hampshire, is about twenty-five miles. From Hungry Hill near Farnham to Oakingham, where its breadth from south to north is the greatest, the distance is about twelve miles; but its average breadth is considerably less. The course of its southern boundary is marked by those sandy elevations, which beginning at Esher extend to Claremont, Painshill, Breach Hill, and Ockham Hill near Ripley. After crossing the river Wey, the sand (thinly spread over the stratum which it covers) may be traced across the plain through which the Basingstoke canal passes. Purford Heath and a series of low commons mark its course to Romping Downs and Gravelpit Hill, about seven miles north-east of Farnham, where it again rises into considerable acclivities. At Tuksbury Hill and Beacon Hill Camp, immediately north of Farnham, it attains its greatest elevation; there approaching within less tliH.n a mile of the ridge of chalk (hat forms the southern limit of the London Basin. The western boundary of the sand may be traced from Beacon Hill Camp in a northerly direction, rapidly declining in height, and extending over a low moorish country to Hartford Bridge: it then again acquires considerable thickness, and forms a regular escarpment extending to Broms Hill Common. There its northern boundary commences, passing thence to the south of Oakingham, at no great distance from the forest road to Reading, until it reaches the hill above Egham. A line of sandy hillocks parallel to the valley of the Thames marks the further progress of its northern and north-eastern boundary at some little distance from the river by St. Anne's Hill and Oatlands to the eastern extremity of the sand at Esher.
  In (racing this outline I have not entered into any very minute topographical details, because the surface over which the sand extends has been laid down from the observations which I made upon it, in company with Mr. Buckland and Mr. Greenough, in Mr. G.'s Geological Map of England.
The general character of the district, in which the sand prevails, is so well known as scarcely to require description. At its eastern extremity it forms a chain of detached hillocks, and in its central part a high continuous plain, which arc strongly contrasted by their barrenness with the fertile country that surrounds them. Such indeed is the character of the vegetation and the general appearance of sterility in the worst parts of this district, that, when the neighbouring fertile country is hidden from the view, one may suppose one's self upon a desolate mountain moor in the border country. Common ling is the natural growth of the meagre sand that forms the higher parts of this district. In the lower parts however, in which some argillaceous beds intervene between those of sand, the vegetation is of better quality; and the lowest parts of all, which consist of a sandy loam resting upon clay, are often (as upon the skirts of Windsor Forest) highly favourable to the growth of large timber.
With regard to the position of the sand, the hill above Egham affords unequivocal proof that there at least it lies immediately upon the surface of the London clay. In the clay-pits to the south of the great western road, near the foot of the hill, the clay is seen characterized by its blue colour, by many of the most common of its fossil shells, and by its scptaria. The sand rests immediately upon the clay, increases in thickness as the hill rises in height, and is continuous with the great body of the sand that extends from Egham Hill to the westward.
That the position of the sand observed at Egham Hill agrees with its position generally throughout the district which it occupies, cannot be doubted.
For the boundary-line which we have traced round the sand, from its eastern extremity at Esher, is also the boundary line which marks the appearance of the London clay, a zone of which completely encircles the sand, exhibiting; itself at a lower level than the sand, and emerging from beneath it.
The London clay may be traced round the sand from Kingston Common at the foot of Esher Hill to Claygate Common and Jessop's Well; thence to Leatherhead Common, Bookham Common, and Ripley, where septaria are found in making ditches. A well 180 feet deep was dug in clay at Horsley, in the refuse of which I observed septaria and some of the commoner shells of the London clay. From Ripley the clay may be traced to Worplesdon. The next place along the boundary-line where I have observed the clay is in some pits in Crondall parish, north-west of Farnham; the stiff land at Hartley Row is probably occasioned by its presence.
Clay with septaria and pyrites is found in pits below the level of the sand in the parish of Finchhampstead near to Broms Hill. At Sheep Bridge, between Stratfield-le-saye and Reading, the clay appears with its septaria in the brook which crosses the road at that bridge; and the clay and septaria are well known to the well-diggers in that neighbourhood. Still further to the west, at Mortimer near to Silchester, I found septaria in a bank of blue clay; and it is highly probable that the clay extends still further to the west at the foot of the high ground which lies to the south of the vale of the river Kennet.
From Binfield a bed of clay may be traced without interruption along the northern acclivity of Windsor Forest to St. Leonard's Hill, Cooper's Hill, and thence to Egham, where (as we have already seen) the nature of the clay is fully exhibited.
  It appears then that the sand uniformly rests upon the London clay: it remains to be ascertained whether it is to be considered as diluvian debris, or as belonging to a regular stratum. Since the sand has not hitherto been found extending beyond the limits of the London clay, or immediately incumbent on the chalk or any other bed beneath the London clay, it would seem probable, for this reason alone, that it belongs to a regular stratum; and this opinion has been confirmed by an attentive examination of the beds of the sand itself.
Those parts of the sand which are nearest the surface are generally more or less mixed with angular chalk flints and other diluvian debris, such as is found upon the surface in almost every part of the London Basin. But below this diluvian matter I have not observed any angular flints, nor any beds but such as in the aggregate materially differ from those which are of diluvian origin. The highest of the undisturbed beds consist of a meagre sand, somewhat ochreous, and not distinguishable from the diluvian sand by any circumstance excepting the absence of angular masses of flint. At a lower level are found beds of foliated green clay, alternating with beds of green sand: extensive beds of this clay are found to the north of Chobham Pack, on the road from Chertsey to Bagshot, where they are worked for the making of bricks and coarse pottery. It is in the beds below this green clay that we find the most unequivocal proof of the sand of Bagshot Heath belonging to a regular stratum. These lowest beds are found on descending the acclivity to the south of Chobham Park. They consist of alternations of white, sulphuryellow, and pinkish foliated marls, containing abundant grains of green sand, regularly stratified, and inclosing fossil shells, such as have not hitherto been found in England in any other bed above the chalk with which I am acquainted. The entire thickness of these lower beds may be about forty feet. The white foliated marl bears a strong resemblance to that of Menil Montant, in which the Menilite is found, near to Paris.
The shelly matter of the fossil shells which these beds contain has altogether perished, so that it is impossible to identify the species, though the genera may be determined. The most abundant of the shells is the cast of a crassatellu, agreeing I believe with a crassatella found in the Paris Basin at Meudon in the catcairegrouier a mature verte, and deposited in the Society's collection. The only other shells which I have found are a pecten, and what appears to have been a trochus.
  At the base of the hill in which these beds are found, a blue clay, which 1 suppose to be that of London, makes its appearance.
Similar beds of foliated marl are found on the continuation of the Bagshot sand at Addlestone near to Chertsey, but no shells have been there observed. The foliated marl is there covered by a clay which strongly resembles in texture, though not in position, some of the varieties of plastic clay.
  At the foot of St. Anne's Hill the beds which lie nearest to the London clay are different from the preceding. They consist of masses of rolled chalk-flint*, closely resembling those of the pebble-bed in the plastic clay, intermixed with green sand, green foliated marl, and stony concretions of that sandstone which is so generally dispersed in masses over the surface of Bagshot Heath.
  I do not believe that the Hertfordshire puddingstone has been derived from the stony concretions of this bed, but rather from those of the plastic clay; the cement of the puddingstone being composed of much purer siliceous matter, and not being so ochreous as that of the grit of Bagshot Heath. The Hertfordshire puddingstone and the grey weathers of Marlborough downs and Abbotsbury contain angular chalk-flints; and I have observed only rounded pebbles in the grit in question.
Among the diluvian debris dispersed over the surface of the heath, quartz crystals are not uncommon. Near Famborough are found upon the surface fragments of an arenaceous limestone, containing many fossil shells, and among the rest, dentalia. It is to Mr. Stokes that I was first indebted for the information respecting these fragments.
  I have lately succeeded in ascertaining the bed from which these fragments are derived. They come from the stony concretions which are found in the beds of sand belonging to the plastic clay, that extend through the low country between Windsor and Reading at the foot of Windsor Forest. They resemble the stony concretions that are found in the same bed at Sundridge Park near Bromley, and agree, perhaps, with those of Bognor rocks.
The existence of these specimens was first announced by Lord Grenville to my friend Mr. Buckland, in company with whom I examined them in situ. 
The place from which the specimens of these stony concretions in the plastic clay which I now send were taken, is the water-course lately made for the purpose of draining the newly-inclosed lands of Windsor Forest, on the road that leads from Hollyport to Binfield. The sand with its concretions there rests upon variegated plastic clay. The shells are the Reading oyster, a Pecten, a large and small Cardium, a Pectun cuius, Nucula margaritacea, two species of Citheraea, a Shell resembling Solen radiatus, a Tellina, a Dentale, Strombus pes-pelicani, Calyptraea trochiformis in great perfection, and several imperfect turbinated shells. There is also a shark's tooth, pyritous wood, and what appears to be the seed-vessel of a marine plant. It is remarkable that the Cerithia, which are found in the same beds in Sussex and near to London, are wholly wanting in the beds at Reading and at the spot in question.
  I propose at some future period to examine the sands of Dorsetshire and Hampshire, which, I have very little doubt, will be found to belong to the same formation as the sand of Bagshot Heath.

