THE following remarks, bearing on the mineral structure of a considerable portion of the south of Ireland, are drawn from me by certain representations made by Mr. Grifiith on the same subject, respecting which my first impression was that I might be content to suffer them to pass without public comment, persuaded that no intelligent geologist, who would duly sift and weigh the evidence adduced on both sides, could be at a loss in coming to a correct decision. But as it is not every reader who will take this trouble, and as unquestioned assertions not unfrequently pass as established truths with the unwary, further reflection has taught me that I owe it both to the Geological Society and to myself not to remain silent. However adverse to controversy, and however irksome the task of entering upon it, a man should always be ready to give a reason for the faith that is in him. I It has so happened that my Memoir on the Geological Relations of the south of Ireland (which in its more material points was communicated to the Geological Society in the year 1830), and Mr. Griffith’s Outline of the Geology of Ireland, with its accompanying Geological Mapf, were brought before the public eye much about the same time, namely, in the early part of 1838. The marked discrepancies observable not only between our respective maps of the south of Ireland, but also in Mr. Griffith’s own map itself, could not fail to strike other geologists as well as myself; while, on referring to the written outline, so far from finding an elucidation of the discordances, the outline itself appeared at variance with the map. I have reason to know that other geologists felt equally unable to discover the precise purport and extent of Mr. Griffith’s meaning, and hence some explanation seemed necessary. Doubtless, aware of such an impression, Mr. Grififith has been led to give that explanation, accompanied by many changes in his views: 1st, in a communication made to the British Association at Newcastle, in August, 18381; 2nd, in a letter addressed to the Rev. Dr. Buckland, Pres. Geol. Soc., in May, 1839; and, 8rd, in a paper read before the Geological Society of Dublin, on the 13th June, 1839, the last-mentioned being accompanied by two sections, one referring to the south-eastern portion of the island, and the other to a part of the extreme west, in the county of Kerry-la The views of Mr. Griffith thus appearing in an authenticated form before the public, and the author having in his last production, while attempting to explain his own positions, found it necessary to assail mine, the time has fully arrived for adverting to those views. Being thus put on my defence, I shall proceed to consider, in connexion, the Outline with its Geological Map, and the three later written communications, with the two sections supplied by the author; and in so doing, I shall feel no difficulty in showing that many of Mr. Griffith’s representations are not only irreconcilable with the facts, but that those representations contradict each other.
The question at issue lies more particularly between the older stratified rocks of the south of Ireland and the old red sandstone properly so called, which occurs in different portions in that quarter of the island.
  In the Outline (at p. 7), Mr. Griffith professes to distinguish the older stratified rocks as consisting of an older and a newer transition series, the latter, which is coloured purple, being said usually to repose unconformably on the former, which is coloured grey; or, as it is later expressed in another place, usually resting unconformably on the greywacke slate or Silurian series; and the old red sandstone, which is said to succeed, being distinguished partly by a reddish-brown and partly by a yellowish-brown colour. Such is the statement. Now, how are these positions established? Mr. Griffith admits the correctness of the view, which I gave more than twenty years since, of the relative position of the old red sandstone, as occurring in detached portions in the county of Wexford, on both banks of Waterford harbour up to the confluence of the Barrow and the Suire, and again along the valley of the latter river west of Waterford, flanking both its sides, that on the north extending into the counties of Tipperary and Kilkenny, and that on the south bordering the river and constituting higher up the Monavoullagh group; in all these cases reposing unconformably on the older stratified rocks. They are thus all placed in the same class as the old red sandstone formation : and this being the case, it may be asked, why is the reddish-brown colour, as indicative of old red sandstone, confined alone to those portions of it which occur in the county of Vexford, extending to the eastern side of Waterford harbour, while on the opposite or western side of that harbour and of the river Barrow, all the other districts specified, and acknowledged to be old red sandstone, are coloured purple, as indicative of a newer transition series? Here is a direct contradiction, both in colours and terms, as well as in the reputed order of succession.
The author having thus in the first place admitted that the old red sandstone of the Monavoullagh range is of the same age as that of the valley of the Suire, of the Barrow at its confluence, .and on the eastern and western confines of Waterford harbour, &c., proceeds next to show that it belongs to a newer transition series: and how is this accomplished by representing the old red sandstone of the Monavolillagh range, the stratified structure of which is admitted to vary only a few degrees from the horizontali, as dip ing in its southern prolongation suddenly to the south at a high angle, and extending down to the coast, namely, to Ballyvoil Head; thus meaning to identify the old red sandstone of the Monavoullagh with the sandstone conglomerate, sandstone, and red slate which occur on that part of the coast in association and interstratified with transition rocks at a high angle. Here, doubtless, lies the main source of Mr. Griffith’s misconception, and the consequent train of errors and inconsistencies into which it has led him; and on the faith of which he ventures to state that, “ had Mr. Weaver, who represented the conglomerate of Monavoullagh as a mountain cap resting on greywacke slate, made a careful section of the strata, either from Monavoullagh or Ballyvoil Head,. he would have been convinced of his error, and probably have arrived at the same conclusion as mine ;” a singular conclusion certainly, inasmuch as there is no apparent connexion whatever between the horizontal sandstone conglomerate of the Monavoullagh range and those beds of conglomerate, sandstone, and red slate of the coast which extend eastward from the vale of Dungarvan in several separate discontinuous bands interstratified with other transition rocks; all these dipping throughout at a high angle, chiefly to the south, but also to the north, which latter position may be seen in the red sandstone conglomerate and the associated rocks in Tranamoe head, within a short distance of Bonmahon river. I have described elsewhere that these rocks of the coast are connected on the north and west with varieties of clayslate (black, blue, green, yellow, red, and purple), alternating with greywacke, quartz rock, hornstone, red sandstone, and conglomerate, and comprising also subordinate beds of greenstone with porphyritic varieties of the rocks which I have enumerated-1'. This statement was not lightly given, having carefully examined the interior in many directions, as well as the whole line of coast extending from Dungarvan harbour on the west to Waterford harbour on the east; and having in the course of my researches (in 1824) discovered transition fossils in the series, I had the greater pleasure in exploring the district, and in ascertaining with exactness the composition and structure of the rocks, as I had just completed and published my account of the Tortworth transition district in Gloucestershire.
But it is not necessary to rely on my own testimony alone. The interesting remarks of Mr. Holdsworth on the eastern part of the county of Waterford, extending from the Bonmahon coast to the Monavoullagh range on the west, illustrated by a map, come in aid of my views; and they may be considered the more valuable as proceeding from an unbiassed observer. And had Mr. Grifiith fully attended to them,  (putting my own descriptions out of the question), he must have seen that Mr. Holdsworth places in the map and speaks in the text of the clayslate formation, as being observable in different places along the eastern border of the Monavoullagh range of conglomerate; and especially as being of considerj able extent in the vicinity of Stradbally, where it is in a highlyinclined position, and in places nearly vertical, stretching thence to the westward toward the vale of Dungarvan, and there coming in contact with the carboniferous limestone of that valley. In its range, therefore, the clayslate formation evidently occupies the district lying between Ballyvoil head on the south and the Monavoullagh range of conglomerate on the'north; and Mr. Holdsworth observes, that in this part the base of the Monavoullagh mountain range approaches close upon the clayslate formation. With respect to the Monavoullagh conglomerate itself, he remarks‘l', that having examined this mountain range in several places along its line from north to south (which extends many miles), and from top to bottom, it nowhere appeared as a'conformable rock. Now, let us return to the coast, stretching eastward from Ballyvoil Head. What is the purport of Mr. Holdsworth’s observations in this quarter, and more inland, in reference to the occurrence of red sandstone conglomerate and red slate as forming beds included in the clayslate formation? He says, that in various places along this line of coast, and particularly around Bonmahon, he met with the conglomerate usually accompanied by red micaceous slate, both being in an inclined position, and having the appearance of being a conformable formation, inasmuch as these strata, where they occur, appear bounded on each side by the common rocks of the coast. And the conglomerate is described as being both coarse and fine-grained, the latter passing by insensible gradations into the red sandstone slate; and a coarse sandstone with ferruginous marks also occurring. The red sandstone slate passes, he says, sometimes into grey slate, portions of which occur abundantly in the composition of the conglomerate of the Monavoullagh range. Mr. Holdsworth, in concluding, touches upon the question as to the source and origin of the conglomerate range of the Monavoullagh and those beds of conglomerate which are conformany associated with the common rocks of the coast and in the interior, which latter he also terms, “detached dyke-like masses 5” and he inquires whether they may have been contemporaneously raised to their present level; a speculation into which I do not think it necessary to enter, the established fact of the difference of position and association, and consequently of date as to origin, being sufficient for my preSent purpose. Other matter is to be Found scattered through Mr. Holdsworth’s observations, which comes very well in corroboration of the general view which I have given of the structure and composition of that district in my memoir on the south of Ireland; although Mr. Holdsworth nowheredraws the distinction himself between the transition conglomerate and sandstone, and the overlying conglomerate and sandstone of the Monavoullagh range, further than by considering the former as a conformable, and the latter as an unconformable formation. On the contrary, he gives it as his opinion that all the conglomerates and sandstones which he has noticed in the eastern part of W'aterford are identical, excepting perhaps those occurring on the north-west of the city of Waterford and those around Dunmore on the western side of Vaterford harbour, which he conceives may be of more recent formation, but no reason is assigned for this opinion. The identity spoken of, however, seems mainly to refer to the similarity of mineral composition, respecting which there can be no difference of opinion. 
But to return to Mr. Griffith. It is clear from the preceding that he has confounded together the old red sandstone formation, properly so called, with the red conglomerate, sandstone, and slate, which occasionally occur'as constituent beds in a transition country.
The horizontal position of the Monavoullagh sandstone conglomerate is quite in accordance with what is observable in the detached portions of the same formation which are studded over the northern border of the clayslate table-land, overlooking from the south the valley of the Suire, and where in the year 1814, when first exploring that country, I found the sandstone conglomerate reposing unconf'ormably on the truncated edges of the subjacent clayslate. Mr. Holdsworth appears to have made a similar observation in a quarry adjacent to the road between Kilmacthomas and Portlaw, where the junction of the clayslate and the conglomerate is very distinctly marked, the slate there being thrown up nearly perpendicular.
Indeed, when we consider the long-drawn range of the Monavoullagh from north to south, being nearly at right angles with the eastern and western strike of the bordering older stratified rocks, both on its eastern and western confines, whose dip varies from south to north, how could we expect any conformity between them?
  If we now pass to the westward of the Monavoullagh sandstone conglomerate range by ascending from the vale of the Blackwater, from Lismore for example, to the table-land on the north, on which are planted the Knockmildown masses of the old red sandstone formation, we traverse in our course the older stratified rocks, still possessing the eastern and western strike, and for the greater part the southerly dip, and in which occur numerous slate quarries. The Monavoullagh sand, stone conglomerate range extends nearer to the declivity leading down to the vale of Dungarvan than the Knockmildown sandstone conglomerate range does towards the Blackwater valley, from which it recedes considerably to the north, and nowhere does that formation approach and reach the vale until we enter upon the region of the Kilworth mountain and the adjacent hills, where it descends toward that valley and supports the carboniferous limestone; while in the defiles and ravines by which that mountain is furrowed, and whose course is toward the Blackwater, the clayslate formation-is exposed to view in strata nearly vertical, supporting the old red sandstone formation in unconformed position. But Mr. Griffith represents the conglomerate of the Monavoullagh as under.lying these older stratified rocks, although they lie mainly to the west rather than to the south of the Monavoullagh range; so that, according to his view, the whole of the schistose country lying to the west of the Monavoullagh range, and extending to Kilworth, together with the superimposed ranges of sandstone and conglomerate of that region, are swamped in one general formation, coloured purple, which colour is made to extend as far south as to a line drawn from near Ringabella inlet, adjacent to the southern entrance of Cork harbour, to the head of Bantry bay, and thence to the western coast opposite to Dursey island, the said colour denoting a newer transition series, while the included bands of limestone are considered as belonging to the carboniferous series, although it is admitted that the adjacent clayslate is interstratified occasionally with the limestone, such slate, however, to meet the occasion, being Called a “carboniferous slate .”
Nor does the dilemma end here. The eastern part of Waterford is coloured grey, as indicative of an older transi- tion series, and the rest of the schistose and conglomerate tract, extending to the western extremity of Kerry and north of the line already noticed, are coloured purple, as signifying a newer transition series. 
Memoir on the South of Ireland, in Geol. Trans, vol. v, in which I have remarked that the formation, as there exhibited, is quite analogous to the old red sandstone of England, presenting the same varieties in colour and composition, and consisting of compact and slaty beds of firm sandstone, associated with others of a looser texture, with sandstone conglomerate, and with beds of indurated clay and slaty clay; the reddish-brown colour predominating in the series. Similar relations are also well displayed in the old red sandstone of Kerry Head and the Slieve Meesh range, as well as in the ranges of Knockfeernagh, Kilcruaig, and Kilmeady, taken in connexion with the chain of the Seefin, Slieve Riagh, Slievennmuck, and Gaultees mountains. Ibid. §§ 48, 49, 50. The parallel might be continued still further north, Ibid. Si 69, as well as in the various quarters indicated in my memoir on the east of Ireland, Geological Transactions.
Now, in the year 1824. I discovered (as before mentioned) transition fossils in the south-eastern part of the county of Waterford, and in 1833 Mr.'Holdsworth observed the same: and in 1829 I found other transition fossils in the western part of the Dingle peninsula in Kerry; and in 1837 Mr. C. W. Hamilton discovered them also in another adjacent locality, to the list of which Mr. Griffith has since added others. Those collected by myself appeared chiefly referable to such as are found in what have since been denominated in England the Cambrian and Silurian systems, and the same inference appears deducible from those later collected. These tracts therefore clearly belonging to an ancient transition series, it may reasonably be inquired why is the Waterford district coloured grey as an older transition series, and that in Kerry purple as a newer transition series 1?
Yet in reference to Kerry and part of Cork Mr. Griffith also contends §, that “the red conglomerate of Cahirconree and Carrantoohill (Gurrane T ual) mountains, together with the coarse red slate of which Tomies and Glenaa mountains at Killarne are composed, belong to the old red sandstone series; andy that the limestone of Killarney, Kenmare, and Bantry, belongs to the carboniferous and not to the transition series.” Having advanced so far, if Mr. Griflith had gone a step further (which he might have done with just as much propriety,) and included the patches of limestone near Skibberecn and Conrtmacsherry bay also in the carboniferous series, the result according to. Mr. Griffith’s view would be that we have no transition limestone at all in the south of Ireland*; and by parity of reasoning, that all the schistose and conglomerated rocks associated with these bands of limestone in that part of the island, belong to the old red sandstone formation, since he cannot deny, and indeed admits, that these bands of limestone are interstratified on their confines with the adjacent rocks.
But in another placer, Mr. Griflith observes, “the schistose strata of the counties of Waterford, Cork, and Kerry, which form the base of the entire district, consist of greywacke and Silurian rocks ;” while in a third place he remarksili, “ I am of opinion that eventually the greater part, if not the whole, of the schistose rocks of the counties of Kerry and Cork coloured greywacke slate on the map, will prove to be Silurian, with the'exception ofa narrow stripe of black clayslate which extends from the western base of Cahirconree mountain to Ballinguard bay east of Dingle harbour.”
  In the new map it will be seen that in the eastern quarter of this tract the purple colour is now converted into reddish-brown, as indicative of old red sandstone, and in the western quarter chiefly into grey, as denoting greywacke slate.
  But remodelled in the new map, with reddish-brown as old red sandstone in the eastern quarter, and grey as greywacke slate in the western, as already mentioned.
   In the new map, the greater part of Kerry and a small part of Cork are now coloured grey, as reywacke slate.
This and the preceding quoted passage, when compared with the map of the “Outline,” are unintelligible, as the only part of' Kerry coloured as greywacke slate is this very band of blackish-grey clayslate, and the only part of Cork so coloured lies south of the line already noticed, as drawn by Mr. Griffith from the coast opposite Dursey island to the head of Bantry bay and thence toward the southern entrance of Cork harbour.
The blackish-grey clayslate to which Mr. Griflith seems to attach so much importance, is- only a member of the general transition series, like the greenish-grey, the reddish-brown, and other coloured slates, all which may be readily found in Kerry, Cork, and Vaterford, and of which I have given sufficient descriptions elsewhere.
  In following Mr. Griffith’s progress thus far, what is the result ? It amounts to this: that with the exception of the eastern part of Waterford lying between the Monavoullagh range ' and the-coast, and the southern part of Cork lying south of the line drawn from near Dursey island past the head of Bantry bay to Ringabella inlet, both of which (coloured grey) are referred to an older transition series or to a Silurian series; all the rest of the schistose and conglomerated rocks, extending from the county of \Vaterford on the east through that of Cork into and through Kerry on the west (coloured purple), are viewed, and designated by Mr. Griflith in different parts of his communications, as the old red sandstone formation, as a newer transition series, as a Silurian series, (all these three being also called an old red sandstone series), and lastly, as an older transition series; while all the bands of limestone included in these schistose and conglomerated rocks, from the limestone band in the valley of the Bride on the north, to that occurring in Bantry bay on the south, are referred to the carboniferous limestone, although admitted to be in direct association with the rocks by which they are bounded).
  In the new map this is now accomplished, the limestone being included and merged in what he is pleased to call “carbonii'erous slate," supported by “yellow and old red sandstone," which assuredly do not exist there.
  The two passages noticed doubtless have reference to the new map, from the different colouring of which they can alone receive illustration ; and here it is to be observed, that the southern part of Cork coloured in the map of the“ Outline” as greywacke slate, is now in the new map most gratuitously distributed into parallel bands of what Mr. Grifiith is pleased to call “old red sandstone” and “ carbonif'erous slate,” to which appellations the strata in question have certainly no pretension. Take, as an example, the region of the Audley copper mines in the county of Cork, described by me in §§ 38, 39, of my Memoir on the south of Ireland, which is coloured by Mr. Griflith as old red sandstone. With equal justice might the region of the copper mines in the county of Wicklow be designated as old red sandstone, since in both cases the constituent rocks are clayslate, quartzy clayslate, and quartz-rock. This is one instance, among many, in which hypothetical views are permitted to supersede the dictates of common sense.
  All this is undoubtedly sufi‘iciently perplexing to a geological inquirer, since it leaves him no secure footing anywhere.
  I now turn to the sections; yet another anomaly claims previous attention. All the old red sandstone tracts lying north of the city of Limerick, as those of the Bilboa and Slieve Bloom mountains, similar districts in the counties of Clare and Galway, and others yet more north, are coloured reddish and yellowish brown ; and with this I do not quarrel further than that the adoption of two colours to designate the same formation seems superfluous, making that to appear complex which is simple, it being well known that both the colours and composition of the old red sandstone formation are very variable; and as to occasional interstratification on the borders with the carboniferous limestone, that may be very well expressed by words. The anomaly I advert to is this, that the old red sandstone of the extensive range of the Gaultees. should be coloured as a newer transition series (purple), while the Slievenamuck and the other ranges more west, which rise in the vale of Limerick (althou h in fact all connected and belonging to the same formation%, are alone coloured as old red sandstone (reddish and yellowish-brown).
  These are the legitimate inferences deducible from the “Outline,” with its map and the three later written communications. The various modifications and alterations given further to these views. as designated by the new map, I have already adverted to in preceding notes.
  A few remarks here upon the construction of sections may not be misplaced. In my sections through the south of Ireland I have endeavoured to combine two objects, namely, to give outlines of the actual forms of the surface presented by nature, and to represent faithfully the relative position of the successive mineral masses, employing as nearly equal scales for heights and distances as the engraving would permit, the difference being only as four to three; but I have not attempted to introduce the differently modified structure of their respective stratification, and for two reasons: 1st, that to do it correctly upon any given transverse line accordin to scale and measure, would require considerable labour, an even when accomplished might not exactly accord with the results of an examination conducted on parallel lines in different longitudes, in a country where the stratification is more or less fluctuating; 2nd, that unless done correctly, such sections, instead of conveying precise information, tend rather to mislead the judgement. In such cases, it appears morejudicious to supply the deficiency by adequate description. 
Now, it is for the second of these reasons that I must object to Mr. Griffith’s sections. They appear to me in many respects drawn rather according to the conceptions of their author than the occurrences in nature. As some proof of this, I will in the first instance take the section which is drawn through the south-eastern part of the island, beginning at the valley of the Suire (where it first intersects the carboniferous limestone), and following it to its extremity in the county of Cork. In this section the vertical scale is to the horizontal scale as twelve to one; which necessarily produces great distortions in the relative position of the mineral masses.
  In the new'map the Gaultees are now also coloured reddish brown, as old red sandstone.
  The same remark applies to the sections drawn in Kerry by Mr. C. W. Hamilton also, but especially so to the section No. 3 in his “Outline of the Geology ofpart ofthe county of Kerry,” in the Journal of the Geological Society of Dublin, vol. i. pp. 276 to 285, in which there is nowhere drawn a clear distinction between the conglomerates and sandstones of the transition series and those of the old red sandstone formation, the one being confounded with the other. Moreover,in No. 3 section, the old red sandstone and the coal measures are confounded together, the latter (north of Tralee) being made to underlie and break through the carboniferous limestone instead of reposing upon it, and the text in 284 is to the same effect. This is the paper referred to by Prof. Sedgwrck and Mr. Murchison in the Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag. in April 1839, at p. 260, and to which I had occasion to advert in the same Magazine for August, 1839, at p. 122. Two later sections in Kerr given by Mr. C. W. Hamilton in the Load. and Edin. Phil. Mag. for cc. 1839, are not only open to the same objection, but they are at variance with themselves, the author representing what he terms “old red sandstone ” to dip in fig. 1 generally south, and in fig. 2 generally north. They are also at variance with his former sections, given in the Journal above referred to, but especially so with the'matters of fact. An unrestrained indulgence of Fancy, with a loose application ofthe terms Cambrian, Silurian, old red sandstone, &c., can tend little to the advancement of Geology.
  Let us first consider that portion of the section which lies between the valley of the Suire and the vale of Dungarvan, the latter of which extends westward to the Blackwater. With respect to the relative position of the carbonii'erous limestone of the valley of the Suire as reposing on old red sandstone, both on its northern and southern sides, there is no question. South of the river, the old red sandstone, which there forms a narrow border, reposes unconformably on the clayslate formation, the former dipping north and the latter south. These relations may be observed in many places, and are well exemplified in passing from the river Suire up the defile which leads to the Glenpatrick slate quarries, about three miles to the east of Clonmell, and which unconi'ormable position is admitted by Mr. Griffith himself 1'. The same relative position is to be observed upon the range eastward also, and to the south of Carrick, through which Mr. Griffith’s section passes; but Mr. Griffith there makes the clayslate of the hill of Carrick, as well as the clayslate extending towards the Monavoullagh range, to dip north, though just - contrary to the fact, the dip being south ; and by interposing a bed of conglomerate, all north of this, extending to the limestone of the valley, is called an “old red sandstone series,” than which assuredly nothing can be more incorrect. For the details I have given, as well as general views affecting this region, I must refer to the 144th section of my Memoir on the east of Irelandi. I have already remarked that the older stratified rocks on which the Monavoullagh range rests, dip generally south, yet are subject to local inflections to the north; but Mr. Grifiith in his section represents the whole of these older rocks as vertical in' the centre, from which the strata are made to incline on the southern side to the south, and on the northern side to the north, the latter being, as] have already stated, contrary to the fact. I have also observed that the Monavoullagh conglomerate range approaches so far towards the vale of Dungarvan, that the schistose and conglomerated rocks lying south of the Monavoullagh range, and north of the carboniferous limestone of the valley, do not reach, to the surface to any great extent; but Mr. Griffith brings into his section as south of the Monavoullagh the older stratified rocks which lie west of the latter, namely, such as we traverse north of Lismore when proceeding from the Blackwater toward the Knockmildown chain, and which in fact are merely the western continuation of the older stratified rocks that are exposed on the eastward of the Monavoullagh range. In the series of strata north of Lismore, and which he designates as the newer transition slate series*, there occur, he observes, in some localities, abundant marine exuviae, and even vegetable remains, e. g. calamites; and he adds that it is possible the whole may belong to the Silurian system-I'; and yet this series is represented as in direct association with the unquestioned carboniferous limestone of the Blackwater valley, which is quite contrary to my observationsi. The appearance of vegetable remains here is interesting, as hearing analogy to a similar occurrence in the transition series at Dunmore in the county of Kerry, observed by the late Mr. A. Nimmo, and as elsewhere remarked since by Mr. Griffith, which will be noticed in the sequel.
The ridge intervening between the limestone of the vale 0f the Blackwater and of Dungarvan, and that of the river Bride, is said to partake of a similar composition to that of the northern side of the Blackwater near Lismore, namely, that of green clayslate, yellow sandstone, and coarse red slate, forming in the centre of the ridge an anticlinal axis, the sandstone containing calamites §. The anticlinal axis I have not seen, the dip which I observed being throughout to the south; while in the‘ composition of the ridge I found moreover numerous varieties of greywacke, slate, quartz-rock, and sandstone, frequently of a reddish-brown hue, also of a. yellowish and whitish cast, and many coarse conglomerates, containing fragments and pebbles of considerable size“.
Having arrived at the valley of the Bride, it is time to advert more directly to the narrow stripe of brownish-yellow, which (as indicative of old red sandstone) is made everywhere to surround in symmetrical order the isolated bands of limestone which occur in the south of Ireland, (save and except those of Bantry bay, Skibbereen, and Courtmacsherry *), and which is also introduced in the vale of the Blackwater and Dungarvan, as underlying the limestone there. Old red sandstone is not within my cognizance in the positions indicated ; and the occurrence of a grey or yellow sandstone with some calamites is another question. For I contend that the old red sandstone formation, in the legitimate sense of that term, nowhere passes to the south of the river Blackwater; and the two districts of that formation which occur in Kerry, namely, in the Slieve Meesh range and Kerry head, lie north of that parallel.
Doubtless influenced by similar systematic views, Mr. Griffith represents the whole series occurring between the valley of the Suire and Cork head as consisting of a regular sequence; which taken in an ascending order between the Suire and the Blackwater, is said to be composed of greywacke and slate, conglomerate, quartz-rock, red slate, yellow sandstone and sandstone-slate, green slate and limestone; and that in traversing the country further south, between the vale of the Blackwater and Cork head, we meet only with a repetition of the same succession between the different bands of limestone encountered in our progress1-. That all these rocks are to be found in the sequence there is no doubt; but I know of no such regularity of order as is proposed, and excepting wholly the Old red sandstone formation from the series, south of the Monavoullagh range. I must also remark that the disposition of the rocks as given does not correspond with the results of my researches, and that anticlinal and synclinal lines appear to be introduced where there is no proof of their existence. I advert in particular to the three bands of limestone, with their bounding schistose and conglomerated rocks, which in their range traverse Cork harbour, and which according to my observations are all in parallel position, with a dip to the south; but Mr. Griffith represents them as forming successive troughs, with corresponding anticlinal and synclinal (lips, of which I certainly have no knowledge. In one essential point, however, we are agreed, namely, that these parallel bands of limestone show, wherever exposed, an interstratification with the adjacent clayslate,both rocks exhibiting in general the sameorganic remains; which are also contained in the clayslate still further south, on the north side of Ringabella inlet, and again on the same parallel to the west, adjacent to the road leading from Cork to Brandon. But in the clayslate and sandstone subordinate to it are found also vegetable remains, showing a further analogy to similar rocks north of the Bride, to those north of the Blackwater, and at Dunmore head in Kerry. Mr. Griffith has given us a list of transition fossils which he had collected at Ferriter’s cove; and another list of those he had obtained from the limestone and clayslate of Cork harbour, at Rostellan, Rinniskiddy, 8zc. Of the latter Mr. Sowerby has pronounced some species to be the same as occur in the carboniferous limestone, and others to resemble such as are found in the older stratified rocks of Devonshire; and it might be added also such as occur also in Ferriter’s cove and in the Silurian system, e. g., Leptwna (Producta) lata, Lepta’na depressa. I may also add, as a further analogy, that in the older stratified rocks of Devon and Cornwall, vegetable remains are likewise met with; e. g., in Devon as observed by Major Harding, the Rev. D. Williams, Professor Sedgwick, and Mr. Murchison ; and in Cornwall by Professor Sedgwick, as noticed by Mr. Ansted in his paper on Endosipizomites.
  But in the new map, these limestones are also bounded by the brownish-yellow stripe, which likewise is made a border to what is designated as reddish-brown “ old red sandstone," wherever the latter is arbitrarily introduced, e. g.,at the heads of Kenmare and Bantry bays, &c., where certainly no old red sandstone has been seen by me. Again, on the western side of the Lower Lake of Killarney, extending westward on the south side of the river Laune, Mr. Grifiith confounds with the old red sandstone, the red conglomerate, sandstone, and red slate of the transition series, which prevail in that quarter, and are well exposed in the pass to Dunloe Gap, all dipping south, yet subject to some inflections.
  Both in the valley of the Blackwater and that of the Suire, Mr. Griffith appears to me to have confounded together the slate clay of the carboniferous limestone with the clayslate of the transition series.
Every addition to our knowledge is valuable, and I trust Mr. Griffith will continue to employ hands in the south of Ireland in collecting fossils, for which he possesses so many opportunities.
Called Cahirconrée by Mr. Griffith, but which denomination I conceive to apply strictly to the mountain range stretching to the west of Bartrigoun.
I have now to advert to Mr. Griffith’s section in the Dingle peninsula, in the west of Kerry, which in no part exactly ac— cords with my observations. In this section the vertical scale is to the horizontal scale as five to one. But the portion which more immediately claims attention is that which extends from the summit of the old red sandstone of the Slieve Meesh range  to the carboniferous limestone in the vicinage of Castle island. The Former is represented as constituting inerely a cap or sheet formed upon an inclined plane from west to east, the strata corresponding, and succeeding each other in that direction to the junction with the carboniferous limestone. I know of no such arrangement. On the contrary, the strata of the old red sandstone are accumulated to a great depth, and certainly in some quarters at least to the level of the sea, if not deeper, being disposed in a gently arched form from north to south, as may be well observed in the defiles and glens which penetrate fron the north into the interior of that mountain range. In this series I have not observed a general dip to the east, the strata even in the most eastern quarter (including beds of red clay and red slaty clay) still preserving the flat arched arrangement From north to south; and it is only at the eastern foot of Slieve Meesh that other beds appear dipping to the east of south, and which from their dissimilarity altogether to the old red sandstone formation of the SlieVe Meesh range, I could only view as a protruding portion of the subjacent transition rocks continued. from the west. I know of no organic remains to invalidate this conclusion. The Spirg'ferze, Produclw, Terebratulw, and Crinoz'dea that I met with were too indistinct to admit of determining the species, but I am mistaken if there be not an Orthz's among the number; while the Favosz'tes which I noticed I apprehend to be Efibrosa. This eastern foot of the Slieve Meesh is represented by Mr. Griffith as composed of a succession of beds of yellow and grey quartzy sandstone, dark grey clayslate, sandstone, dark grey clayslate, grey quartzy sandstone, alternating limestone and greenish clayslate, against which the carboniferous limestone is exhibited as abutting in unconformable position 1'. The sandstone is stated to contain calamites, and the general series to abound with the casts of' fessils, whose distinctive characters, it is admitted, it is difficult to recognise, but among them are Praductae, Spirg'fi’ne, Terebratulae, Crinoz'dea, and cOrals; and the upper beds of the greenish grey clayslate are said to be identical with those which occur alternating with limestone in the peninsula of Muckruss. I confess I have not traced any such uninterrupted succession as is here described, the country in general being well covered up; but if we suppose it to be correct, there is no direct proof that such succession belongs to the carboniferous series. From the quarry which 1 have described at Riversville on the right bank of the Maine, a low ridge crosses that river and extends some distance beyond it, in which I could discover traces only of the greywacke formation, and around which the carboniferous limestone of the vale appears to sweep on the north, east, and south, in nearly horizontal position, wherever exposed in the adjacent quarries. For these several reasons my view necessarily differs from that taken by Mr. Griflith.
From the preceding it will be inferred that I do not consider Mr. Griffith’s representations as in any respect invalidating the conclusions to which I have been led, as exhibited in my memoir on the south of Ireland. The day is past when it might be authoritatively pronounced that such and such a limestone is carboniferous merely because it contains some fossils that are common to the latter. I have entered at some length into this subject in my memoir on the south of Ireland and in the Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag. for August 1839, to which I beg to refer. But I cannot avoid noticing in this place, as a case in point, the communication made by Mr. Austen to the British Association, at Birmingham, in August, 1839, respecting the fossil remains of the limestones and slates of South Devoni, which in its general views so well corresponds with the tenor of my publication in the Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag. of the same month, although our respective observations and inferences were made independently of each other. Mr. Austen conceives that a great identity of species can be established between the Radiarz'a, Mollusca, and Crustacea, of a portion of the Rhine and those of South Devon ; and he states that both districts present many forms of animal structure, such as in this country we should call carboniferous, and that of forty species which were enumerated, some were hardly, and some not at all, to be distinguished from those of our mountain or carboniferous limestone. 1 r. Austen considers as the geological equivalents of the slates and limestones of South Devon those of the Rhine and Eifel, and that strata in the south of Ireland are of the same age; observing also that many of the same fossils occur at Nehou and St. Sauveur in Lower Normandy. He remarks also that old red sandstone is an unfit name to designate the limestones and roofing slates of South Devon, or the white sandstones of Lower Normandy and Brittany. To which I may add, that it is also inapplicable to the older stratified rocks of Ireland.
  I may here appropriately advert to the remarks made by Capt. Portlock, R.E., late President of the Geol. Soc. of Dublin, on Mr. Griffith’s arrangement of the strata in the south of Ireland, as well deserving of the attention of the latter. He observes, that Mr. Griffith’s transference of those strata which were formerly designated as of the transition epoch to the old red sandstone, must be considered as springing from the generalizations in Devonshire of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison. To those generalizations I have objected in the paper referred to above in the Loud. and Edin. Phil. Mag. for August 1839; and I have already stated that Mr. Austen started similar objections in the same month. But we may proceed a step further, and show that evidence is not wanting to prove that the older stratified rocks of Devon and Cornwall belong to an ancient transition series. The genus Clymenia, discovered and determined by Count Miinster in the Fichtelgebirge, occurs also in Cornwall and Devon according to the observations of Mr. Ansted, Professor Sedgwick, Mr. Murchison, Mr. De la Beche, and Professor Phillips. In the Fichtelgebirge the Clymeniae are accompanied by Goniatz'tes also, and Count Miinster enumerates fourteen species of the former and twenty-six species of the latter, together with one hundred and eighteen species of other fossils; namely, Trilobz'tes 14 species, Serpula l, Belleroplzon 3, Ortlloceras 22, Gasteropoda 31, Conchz'fera 43 (among which are species of Ortizis and Terelwratula, but no sz'rgfera, according to M. Von Buch 1-), Crinoz'dea 4. This tract is referred by Count Miinster to an ancient transition series, the Clymenire being confined to it, and not occurring in the upper strata of the country, namely, in the carboniferous limestonei. Von Buch also considers this tract and the environs of Prague as belonging to the more ancient strata of the transition epoch, and as being perhaps the oldest of that class to be found in Germany. And M. Beyrich makes the general observation, that Clymeniee appear restricted to the older transition strata, not having hitherto been met with either in the later transition limestones or in the carboniferous limestone; while Goniatites on the other hand, he remarks, are widely spread in strata both of the transition and carboniferous epochs, extending in the latter series into the coal formation. Now, at South Petherwin in Devon, Professor Phillips has ascertained that at least four species of Clymemw occur, undoubtedly belonging to the same group as is found in the Fichtelgebirge, and among these one is identified as the Clymenia lwvigata of Count Miinster. With these he notices also two species of Goniatz'tes, one of which belongs to the same group that occurs in the Fichtelgebirge. But we need not rest here: other decided transition fossils are met with in the older stratified rocks of Devon and Cornwall, e. g., various species of T erebratula and Atrypa, namely, such as occur in the transition tracts of Sweden, in Gothland, &c., together with species of Ortlzz's, Plerinea, Leptana lata, &c., for the general list of which I refer to the work of Mr. De la Beche already cited, as well as to the observations of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchisoni. I cannot doubt that more extended researches in Devon and Cornwall will vastly increase the list, and yet bring to light many facts of high interest.
  To Capt. Portlock we are indebted for the discovery of a small transition district in the county of Tyrone, which embodies several fossils common both to the Silurian region and to certain transition tracts in North America.
  It is remarkable that Prof. Sedgwick formerly considered the strata containing the fossils that have been indicated (and which include also Trilobite: and Ortboceratites), as the lowest fossiliferous rocks in Devonshire and Cornwall. And at, according to a later view, originating in the suggestion of Mr. Lons ale, Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison now include all the older stratified rocks of Devon and Cornwall under the head of old red sandstone; and to this view it appears Mr. Greenough has been led to conform, as .shown by the colouring of those tracts in the new edition of his Geological Map of England and Wales. Viewing the subject, as I do, with the eyes both ofa geologist and a miner, I must here, with all respect, repeat my protest against any such generalization, such appearing to me contrary to all analogy, and as only tending to confound subjects essentially distinct. The designation as Devonian might not be equally objectionable, as that does not necessarily bind us to more than what we actually encounter within the limits of the older stratified rocks of Devan and Cornwall, respecting which, however, we yet require much additional information. 
 While on the subject of the distribution of organic remains, I will add a few remarks on that of Goniatites in particular, in transition and carboniferous strata. If we compare together the labours of M. Von Buch, Count Miinster, M. Beyrich, and Professor Phillips, on this subdivision of the tribe of the Ammonites, the general result is that in the older transition rocks the Goniatites met with possess a simple dorsal lobe, whilst those which occur in the carboniferous series have a divided dorsal lobe. If this observation were rigidly exact, it might be adopted as a distinctive character between strata of the transition and carboniferous epochs respectively; and it might also be inferred that limestones which contain Goniatites, some of which possessed a simple and others a divided dorsal lobe, might be considered as occupying an intermediate station, that is, as belonging to the later portion of the transition series. But in neither case does the rule appear to hold without exceptions. Thus, of the 26 species of Goniatites noticed by Count Miinster in the Fichtelgebirge, the 22 (four being doubtful) which are strictly defined and figured, have all a simple dorsal lobe; but two other species are figured by M. Von Buch, as derived from thence, with a divided dorsal lobe, namely, Ammonites z'mequz'striatus, tab. ii. fig. 10, and A. semistriatus, tab. ii. fig. 12. Of 8 other species described and figured by Von Bach, and referred to but not figured by M. Beyrich, 5 are found in transition tracts, and four of these have a simple dorsal lobe, and one a divided dorsal lobe; while of the three species found in the carboniferous series, two haVe a simple and one-a divided dorsal lobe. M. Beyrich has described 18 species of Goniatites, and 14 of these are figured, but in 12 only are the dorsal and lateral lobes given, and of 10 of these which are derived from transition tracts, five have a simple and five a divided dorsal lobe; while in the two found in the carboniferous series the dorsal lobe is divided. M. Beyrich enumerates (including the eight new species designated by himself) altogether 42 species of Goniatites, the greater number being derived from the researches of Count Miinster and M. Von Bach, and a few from the descriptions given by Professor Goldfuss and MM. Martin and Sowerby. Of this list four or five species only are referred to the carboniferous series. Professor Phillips enumerates 33 species of Goniatites as occurring in the carboniferous system of Great-Britain and Irelandllr. Of these he has represented the dorsal and lateral lobes of 2% species, out of which 21 possess a divided dorsal, and three a simple dorsal lobe. Of the 33 species, 30 are first made known to us by Professor Phillips; only three of them having been previously noticed by authors, namely, Goniatites sphwrz'cus (Mart.), Gan. Listerz' (Mart.), and Gun. Henslowi (Sow.)
  I have no doubt, that Professor Phillips, who is so well qualified for the task, will give due attention to this subject in Devon and Cornwall; and it will be interesting to learn in what degree the Goniatites of the carboniferous limestone in North Devon, near Barnstaple (e. g., at Swimbridge, where they abound), differ from those found in the transition districts of South Devon and Cornwall. The same subject deserves attention in Ireland.
  To M. Von Buch we owe the first precise distinction between Nautili and Ammonites. The range of the former extends, it is well known, from the oldest to the most recent of the fossiliferous strata, the genus being still in existence. The Ammonites, on the other hand, though equally ancient in origin, do not in their range pass beyond the limits of the cretaceous group. To the same distinguished naturalist we owe the distribution of the Ammonites into 14 familiesI, the first and oldest of which, the Goniatites, are characteristic of the transition and carboniferous epochs, not extending beyond the coal formation; the second, the Ccratz'tes, appear confined to the muschelkalk; while the remaining 12 families are distributed through the series of formations extending from the lias to the chalk'inclusive. But we are indebted, primarily, namely, in 1828, to Professor Bronn of Heidelberg, for the important observation so conducive to the distinction of formations, that no Ammonites with denticulated lobes have been found in strata of the transition and carboniferous aeras, such being confined to the formations of a later origin. This remark was publicly made known by Von Buch in 1829, nearly at the same time that M. Elie de Beaumont was preparing to announce a similar observation, made by himself; and the remark was shortly after confirmed and generalized by Count Minster. 
Deshayes, however, has lately remarked that true Ammonites (with denticulated lobes, I presume) have been found in strata more ancient than the coal formation, namely, in the environs of Tournay.
  In reference to my successive memoirs on the east and south of Ireland, I will here add the general remark, that it has been my endeavour in both to embody in few words the results of practical experience and observations conducted at intervals in that country during a lapse of more than forty years; and in laying them before the public, it has been my object, in both cases, to exhibit through the medium of condensed abstracts a compendious view of the relations of the tracts described, thus relieving the reader from the labour and tedium of passing through the progressive steps of extended researches. That a minute examination of theground which I have trodden may lead to further discoveries, particularly in respect of the distribution and numbei of the organic remains, I am far from disbelieving, and I shall be ready to hail their appearance with pleasure; but as in the development of the main relations of the mineral masses I have endeavoured to be exact, I may be excused if I do not anticipate any very great accession to our knowledge in the latter respect.
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the preceding ages were committed to the press, a paper by Mr. Griffit, entitled “ On the True Order and Succession of the Older Stratified Rocks in the neighbourhood of Killarney and to the north of Dublin,” has reached my hands. In reference to the vicinage of Killarney, I feel it incumbent on me to offer a few remarks.
  I think it unfortunate that Mr. Griffith should persevere in placing in the same parallel, and designating by the same name, two series of strata which by his own showing are clearly in a different order and in a difi'erent position; thus pursuing the same course in Kerry as in Waterford, alike productive of obscurity and confusion, by a misapplication of the term “ old red sandstone.” Thus this formation, which is so well characterized in the Slieve Meesh range (Cahirconrée of Mr. Grifiith), by its peculiar beds, horizontal disposition, and in overlying unconformably the older stratified rocks situated on the west (which latter generally approach the vertical position), is placed in parallel with those beds of conglomerate, sandstone, quartz-rock (greywacke), and clayslate, occasionally coloured of a reddish hue, which form incidentally intercalated conformable portions of the consecutive transition series, and to all, or some, of such beds as the case may be, when thus coloured, aflixing also the term “old red sandstone ;” e. g., in Macgillicuddy’s Reeks, in Dunloe Gap, in Purple, Tomies, and Glenaa mountains, in Brickeen island and Muckruss peninsula, and in the valley of Kenmare. Yet Mr. Griffith himself, in combating the positions of Mr. Charles W. Hamilton, insists that the red sandstone, where occurring in these localities, has been deposited conformabe ou the older slate (which latter he seems disposed to refer to the Cambrian or Silurian aeras), and in a descending order graduates imperceptibly into that rock. This being admitted, why not designate this a transition red sandstone (as I have always done) in contradistinction to the old red sandstone of the carboniferous epoch, found in unconfbrmable position, and commonly distinguished, in some parts of its extent at least, by beds of red clay, red marly clay, and red slaty clay; e. g., in the Slieve Meesh range and in Kerry Head? Much ambiguity would be avoided by observing this difference in language. Again, after such an admission, it may be asked, why are these rocks, together with the limestone of Muckruss, of the islands of the Lower Lake of Killarney, and extending toward that town, blended by Mr. Griflith with the carboniferous series? This limestone within its own area not only alternates with certain beds of the older stratified rocks, the prevailing dip being to the south, but in their lateral extension it is enveloped by and interlocked with them, which latter relation is clearly proved by the position of the greywacke, sandstone, and slaty-rocks in the northwestern portion of Muckruss peninsula, intervening between the limestone of the islands on the north and that of the south-eastern portion of the peninsula. Mr. GriHith conceives he has solved the question by the introduction of a fault ranging from Dunloe Gap through Purple, Tomies, Glenaa, and the southern part of Brickeen Island, and under Turk Lake to the main land east, where it is confessedly not visible, diluvial matter occupying the surface. This supposed fault does not appear to rest on any proof of actual disruption by an up or down throw, or by a lateral movement, but to be 'merel an inference drawn from the difference of strike observab e between the strata that have been interrupted in their eastern and western continuation by the excavation of Dunloe Gap or by the formation of Turk Lake or the Lower Lake. I have seen no such dislocation in the masses extending from Dunloe Gap through Purple, Tomies and Glenaa mountains, to Brickeen island (beyond which to the east everything must be imaginary), as is indicated in Mr. Griffith’s plan and sections; nor does he clearly aver that he has seen such himself, his idea of dislocation appearing mainly to rest on a seeming unconformity arising from some differences of strike*. The whole question, I think, is simply solved by two considerations: lst, by the inosculation of the several strata, whether schistose, conglomerated, or calcareous, in the line of their strike, while all dip conformably south; 2nd, that where the line of strike has been irregularly broken through by superficial excavations on the existing dry land, as in Dunloe Gap, or by the intervention of spaces occupied by water, as in the Lower Lake of Killarney, and in Turk Lake, thus separating and removing from observation the direct continuity of strata, if we find some difference of strike in the opposite dismembered masses, it is not necessary to imagine a fault in the case, and to represent the distant strata as forming, when protracted, abutting angles upon such a line of fault, since a simple flexure of the strata upon the line of strike explains the whole matter at once. And this is quite in accordance with the general observation I have made on the older stratified rocks of the south of Ireland, as possessing, when viewed on the large scale, an east and west strike, yet subject to inflections from that line, which are locally of greater or less extentf. The opposite shores of Turk Lake, and those of the Lower Lake of Killarney also, being thus brought into connexion by a simple curvature of the strata, remove all difficulty, bearing in mind that the constituent strata are not persistently continuous, but interlock with each other; and the same may be affirmed with respect to the relations in Dunloe Gap.
  
  lt is as if we were to draw a straight line to denote the general east and west strike, and then upon this straight line to trace an undulated one, the successive curvatures ofwhich rising above and falling below the straight line, would express the local strikes. in such a view it is obvious, that if the inflected line be divided into parts, and certain intervening portions be removed, that the remaining separate parts may appear to have a different strike relatively to each other, although in fact constituting portions of the same series, as, for example, in the opposite shores of Turk Lake.
  
But if the supposed fault were even real and not imaginary, how would it prove that all the strata north of it belong to one aera, and those to the south of it to another, while analogous strata in the valley of Kenmare are in uninterrupted connexion with each other, being there also included in and interlocked one with the other, and not persistently continuous beyond a certain extent? The key presented by Mr. Grifiith does not appear to me to answer the purpose, nor can I perceive the anomaly which he conceives to arise from the southerly dip being persistent*; since among transition strata some are presented to us merely as intercalated bands with a corresponding dip, while others of a similar character are deposited in troughs, e. g., in Nassau and Belgium contrasted with the Eifel, as noticed in a preceding part of this paper.
The whole subject, so far from being of a mysterious character-, strikes me as sufficiently clear, and which I think may be made to appear by merely taking Mr. Griflith’s own statements for our guide. Let us, in the first instance, follow him from the entrance of Dunloe Gap on the north and ascend to the summit of the Reeks on the south; and in the second, consider the view taken by him of a proposed section drawn across Dingle peninsula from Brandon bay on the north, to Feilaturrive on the south ; in both cases employing his own language, more or less condensed, yet placing the series under numbers for the sake of greater distinctness.
From Dunloe Gap upward, the succession is thus given:
  1. Reddish-grey quartzose rock; coarse-grained reddishgrey conglomerate; coarse-grained brownish-red slate (quarried for roofing slate); red quartzose sandstone alternating with coarse slate, the sandstone presenting occasionally a conglomeritic characters.
  2. Chloritic quartz-rock, alternating occasionally with thin beds of green and purple clayslate; grey quartzose beds, alternating with thin beds of purplish clayslate.
  3. Reddish-grey quartzose beds, alternating with thin beds of purplish clayslate.
   It. Higher up, in ascending to the summits of the Coumeen Peest or eastern ridge of the Reeks, the strata become more red, and pass into a brick or cherry-red quartz-rock with some beds of conglomerate, identical in colour, composition, and structure with the red sandstone situated to the north of the (supposed) fault in the Gap of Dunloe, but not so coarse-grained.
  Compare this with the description which I have given of the entrance to Dunloe Gap, in my Memoir on the South of Ireland, in SS 10, in which I have shown that these strata vary in their dip between the vertical and the horizontal, subject to undulations from north to south, yet with a general dip to the south. It is here Mr. Grifiith introduces his supposed fault, but which, as before stated, I conceive to be merely an apparent devtilation in the line of strike proceeding from an interrupted curvature of t e strata.
The conglomerate on the top of the Reeks is perfectly conformable with the underlying strata, and, in fact, a regular gradation may be traced from the lower or chloritic portion of the series through the reddish-grey into the brick-red quartz-rock and conglomerate.
  Proceeding now to the Dingle peninsula, the succession given also from north to south, namely, from Brandon bay to Feilaturrive, is as follows:
  1. Dark blackish-gray clayslate, the upper beds of which alternate with reddish-purple slate, some of which contain Silurian fossils.
  2. Red slaty conglomerates, alternating with red and green slate and brown quartz-rock.
  3. Chloritic quartz-rocks, with alternating purplish and reddish-grey clayslate, similar in composition and character to those of the Gap of Dunloe, and of that district generally.
Now, on the preceding I have to observe, that, as the prevailing dip of the strata is to the south, these rocks of the Dingle peninsula may be considered as lying deeper in the series than those which range in a more southerly parallel, namely, as extending from Dingle bay to the lakes of Killarney; yet the whole, on both sides of the bay, may assuredly be considered, in reference to their general composition, structure, and characters, as closely related to each other, and as forming one sequence; and taken in this point ‘of view, there appears no difficulty in assigning the red conglomerate, red sandstone, and red slate at the entrance to and in Dunloe Gap to their proper position in the series. Mr. Griflith admits that in the higher parts of the Reeks (No. 4-, as given above) the same red conglomerate is found as occurs below in the Gap of Dunloe (No. 1), the latter being succeeded by the chloritic quartz-rock (No. 2), which alternates with thin beds of green and purple clayslate. Again in the Dingle peninsula we find also red slaty conglomerates (No. 2 of that series), succeeded by chloritic quartz-rocks (No. 3), which alternate with purplish and reddish clayslate. Surely the analogy here is very close, bespeaking alternations of similar rocks in a line from north to south. In the Dingle peninsula the red conglomerates (No. 2) repose upon the blackish-grey clayslate (No. l), with beds of reddish-purple slate, and some Silurian fossils. The immediate substrata of the Dunloe red conglomerate, sandstone, and red slate are not visible, being uncorgformably overlaid on the north by the carboniferous limestone in the western quarter, and by the coal formation in the eastern ; while, on the other hand, the transition series of the Dingle peninsula, just described, are uncorgformably overlaid on the east by the old red sandstone of the Slieve Meesh range (Cahirconrée of Mr. Griffith); the difference in the aeras of production between the transition series and the carboniferous series being thus in both cases clearly marked .
  But the conglomerate visible in the western ranges of the Reeks, in Lisbug mountain, is fully as coarse-grained as that of the Gap of Dunloe. 
  To the south of the strata of which we have been speaking, there is a band of blackish-grey clayslate, which may deserve Mr. Griffith’s attention. It is traversed by the new line of road from Killarney to Kenmare, as it passes up by the line of the Upper Lake, and if duly examined might perhaps be found productive of fossils. his instance may suffice to show that there is no want of repetition of similar beds in a line traversing the series from north to south. In the general succession occur also well-defined greywacke and greywacke slate, terms which being out of favour with some geologists, Mr. Griffith appears to avoid using, although highly distinctive and useful when employed in a legitimate sense.
Upon the whole, I see no reason to depart from the opinion which I have formerly given, namely, that the limestone of the region of Muckruss extending to Killarney, is a local deposit enveloped and intercalated in the general transition series. And the same view, as to their forming portions of the consecutive series, applies to the other limestone bands in the south of Ireland, whether inclosed in and interstratified with the adjacent rocks, or merely superimposed and interstratified in the form of a trough with the subjacent series. In the valley of Kenmare this latter position appears to be established by the detailed researches of Mr. Griffith, which, I confess, escaped my observation.
That among the strata in immediate association with the bands of limestone in the south of Ireland, some should be found, whether bearing the character of sandstone or clayslate, containing certain vegetable remains, cannot be held sufficient to invalidate the general view which I have taken; 1st, because such remains are not wholly foreign to a transition country; and 2nd, because it has been shown that the older stratified rocks of the south of Ireland form one consecutive series.
This paper was drawn up before I had seen another Geological Map of Ireland put forth by the author, on a large scale, in 1839 “; and to this ‘ latter map, it appears, Mr. Grifiith’s two last-mentioned communications refer also in part. If the discrepancies in the map appended to the “ Outline” were startling, the numerous arbitrary alterations introduced in the new map are no less striking; and it may fairly be inquired what reliance is to be placed on either of them, disagreeing largely as they do with each other. I can perceive, in the new map, an approximation in some parts to my own views, but an utter discordance in other parts. As, however, the alterations which have been made in the new ma do not materially inter; fere with the course of my argument, which in t e first instance bears directly on the map attached to the “ Outline,” I have left the text unchanged, merely adding incidentally a few notes in reference to the new map, for the purpose of continuing the comparison. The discrepancies between Mr. Griffith’s two maps and my own map of the south of Ireland, will thus become doubly apparent.


