IN the more recent views set forth by Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison on the Classification of the older stratified Rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall, my Memoir on North Devon f is adverted to, and some allusion is also made to Ireland. I have much regretted that the state of my health has for a considerable time past prevented my attending the meetings of the Geological Society, or any one of those of the British Association. It would otherwise have afforded me greater satisfaction to have given any explanation that might have been required viva voce, rather than to have recourse to writing that which may now be deemed necessary.
With respect to the relative age of the culmiferous rocks of Devon, extending from the siliceous or argillaceous shales and carbonaceous limestone upward, it appears now to be generally admitted that they belong to the carboniferous series. But it is contended that from those siliceous and argillaceous shales downward there is both a conformity with, and a gradation into the subjacent Trilobite clayslates, which constitute the northern boundary of the carboniferous trough; and that this body of clayslate (according to the Rev. D. Williams three to five miles wide) with subordinate layers of limestone, together with the other old stratified rocks, (composed, in a descending order, of the Wollacomb and Marwood sandstones, Morte clayslates, Ilfracombe, Berry-narbor and Comb Martin limestones, Trentishoe sandstones and clayslates with quartzy clayslates and quartz-rock, Linton clayslates with beds of quartz-rock and sandstone and layers of limestone, and the Foreland sandstone), are to be considered as the equivalents of the Old Red Sandstone, and not referable partly to the Silurian and partly to the Cambrian system, as formerly stated. As I do not concur in these new views, it appears to me but right to endeavour briefly to give some further explanation of the grounds upon which 1 formed my own individual opinion, as expressed in the Memoir read before the Geological Society, referred to above, and to which I still adhere; namely, that the Older Stratified Rocks of North Devon, though distinguished by some peculiarities, belong to the transition epoch. These additional reasons will also make manifest the principles upon which I differ from the new position taken by Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison.
And first, as to gradation. "When two formations are in juxta-position, gradation from one to the other may be conceived as taking place in two ways; either by an alternation between the beds of the two formations on the line of their conjunction; or, where there is no such alternation, by an incorporation and interchange of their individual characters, as dependent on mineral composition and the remains of ihe organized bodies which they contain respectively. Now, I have not found either of these cases applicable in North Devon to the line of junction of the Trilobite slates with the carboniferous strata. On the contrary, we pass at once from the Trilobite clayslates (partly glossy and finely laminated) and containing other peculiar organic remains, to coarse shales free from any such remains, and more or less indurated and siliceous, in connexion with the carboniferous limestone.
Secondly, as to conformity. It can scarcely be necessary to remind a geologist of extended practical experience, that in exploring the boundary lines of two conjoining formations of different aeras, the two may be found both in conformable and in unconformable position with each other in different portions of their expanse; the extent of conformity or unconformity in any one part depending on the form and direction of their respective stratification in that part. But in determining the relative age of the two formations, I consider unconformity (on however small a scale developed in a given district) as the rule for our guidance, (especially when supported by corroborative considerations,) the conformity in such case arising merely from coincidence in the stratification. As an instance, I will refer to the position of the Old Red Sandstone of Gloucestershire in relation to the subjacent transition beds. In the environs of Tortworth, the strata of the two formations are in the eastern quarter of the field in conformable position, while in the western and north-western quarters they are for the greater part unconformably disposed. Similar relations appear also in the N.W. of Gloucestershire and adjacent parts of Herefordshire. Now, no one contends that these formations are of the same epoch, but quite the contrary: the Old Red Sandstone here also, be it observed, containing no fossils of the transition aera, nor any other except some vestiges of vegetable remains. And if we refer to Ireland, similar observations may be made: thus, for example, the same body of Old Red Sandstone, which surrounds the Bilboa mountains, lies near Newport unconformably, and at the outlet of the Bilboa river conformably, on the subjacent clayslate; arising in fact from the variable position of the clayslate strata, while that of the Old Red Sandstone is more constant, being disposed in extended overlying sheets t- It appears needless to multiply instances. In all such cases unconformity must assuredly be taken as the governing principle in deciding relative age.
Now, to apply this to North Devon. While admitting the generally apparent parallelism (namely, conformity of strike, but not necessarily of dip) between the beds of the carboniferous series and the subjacent Trilobite slates, I have adduced two examples of what appeared to me nonconformity; the one in Runson Lane on Rosa Hill, South of Barnstaple, the other in the region of the Pill near Muddlebridge on the south side of the harbour. In Runson Lane the relations on which I rely may not be very obvious to a passing explorer, as they are not so directly apparent in the road as in the bank above, and even there the relations are partially concealed by soil and herbage, and require close inspection. Here the coarse shale, which abuts against the Trilobite slate (both dipping south), is inflected to the north, and forms an arched curve overlying the latter, and therefore unconformable. The space exhibited is certainly not considerable, yet seemed to me sufficient to determine the fact, when duly examined; while the total dissimilarity in the characters, both mineralogical and zoological, of the coarse shale and the Trilobite slate, is a corroborative. In this part of the section laid before the Geological Society, I did not attempt a finished drawing of the accompanying soil, herbage, &c, but simply expressed the fact of unconformity. In the other case, near Muddlebridge, I derived the unconformity partly from observation, partly from inference. There the Fremington limestone and shale form an arched curve, broken at the surface, supporting on each side the sandstone of the coal-measures, the latter being in mass on the southern side, but appearing only as a remnant on the northern side; in the former case dipping 70° to the S.W. and in the latter 50° to the N.E. The immediate contact of these carboniferous strata with the subjacent Trilobite slates is not visible, but in the nearest adjoining portion of the latter formation exposed to our view, namely, in the Bickington quarries on the east, we find the dip of the beds to be 60° to the southward. If then we suppose, as we are justified in doing, that these beds extend to the westward under the carboniferous strata near Muddlebridge, the unconformity of the two formations becomes manifest. The nearest Trilobite slates seen on the north show also a southerly dip. It was to illustrate these relations that I constructed the diagrams of a plan and section in the region of Muddlebridge, as laid before the Geological Society. 
  On the other hand, if we proceed to the southern side of the Devonshire carboniferous trough, it is admitted that in one case at least an unconformity is observable between the carboniferous series and the subjacent schistose rocks, although a general coincidence or parallelism in the strike of their respective strata may be apparent adjacent to their boundary line j but the culmiferous series in a part of its extent is said to rest also upon granite. Mr. Austen, however, has repeatedly stated that the culmiferous measures in South Devon rest unconformably upon a series of deposits belonging to the transition system f j and some of the remarks of Mr. De la Beche in that quarter are much to the same effect.
That the carboniferous group of Devon should be directly deposited on rocks of the transition epoch, without the intervention of the Old Red Sandstone, should not surprise us, since analogous occurrences may be noticed in other parts of the island, e. g. in those portions of Pembroke, Westmoreland, and Cumberland where the Old Red Sandstone is wanting; so also in the South of Ireland. Nay, in some quarters of the world coal tracts are found reposing immediately on granite, e. g. in France and in Virginia, U.S. From the mere juxta-position of formations, all will admit that we cannot draw a direct inference as to their relative age. 
Thirdly, as to the relative age of the Older Stratified Rocks of North Devon,extending from theTrilobite slates near Barnstaple on the S. to the Foreland sandstone on the N. In now considering these deposits as the equivalents of the Old Red Sandstone, the authors appear to have been led partly by relying on an apparent conformity and gradation between the Trilobite slates and the superincumbent carboniferous rocks, and partly and chiefly from observing that in these Older Stratified Rocks, though distinguished by many transition fossils, are yet to be found certain Spiriferae, Productre, and Terebratuloe, with perhaps some other organic exuviae, similar to such as occur in the carboniferous series; at the same time throwing overboard all regard for the mineralogical distinctions which are observable in these Older Stratified Rocks. With respect to the two first points, the supposed conformity and gradation, I have already expressed the grounds of my dissent; and with regard to the third, the occurrence of certain Spirifera?, Products, and Terebratuloe, it may be remarked, that so far back as the year 18'J1 f I intimated that some species of those genera are common both to the transition and carboniferous epochs; and in my observations on the South of Ireland between that year and 1830, and renewed in the year 1834, I was confirmed in that view, and which has been since set forth in my Memoir on that portion of the island (published in 1837), in which I have shown that in particular several species of those genera, besides others, occur in various countries both in the transition and carboniferous systems J. From analogous occurrences in the limestones of South Devon, at Plymouth, &c, Professor Phillips was induced in 1833 to express doubts as to whether those limestones really belonged to the transition system. To these doubts I adverted in a note to the 3S §. of my Memoir on the South of Ireland. Analogous relations appear also to exist in the transition countries adjacent to the Rhine, and the wprks now in progress to illustrate the organic exuviae found in those tracts may assist in throwing additional light on this subject.
This case, however, is not a singular one in geology, it being well known that in the instance of any two systems following one the other in the geological progression, although distinguished respectively by peculiar organic remains, yet certain species occur common to both systems. The partial appearance therefore of certain species among the fossils of transition strata which are common in the carboniferous series also, does not appear a sufficient reason for including such transition strata in the formation of the old red sandstone. Still less could any such inference be drawn from a consideration of the component rocks, for, taken as a whole, none can be more dissimilar than the Older Stratified Rocks of North Devon, and those which have hitherto been met with and described as constituting the Old Red Sandstone formation. If in attempting to remove this difficulty, namely, as arising from the difference of mineralogical character, we have recourse to metamorphism, what is there gained by such an assumption? We can hardly suppose any very intense development of heat in the present instance. But supposing the highest stale of excitement, that of igneous action, could we expect other than an intimate chemical combination of the constituents of the rocky masses, and a new arrangement of the molecules according to the laws of their polarities? What evidence have we of any such intensity of action in the present case? Not in the mineral characters certainly, nor are the organic remains which are distributed in the series obliterated; on the contrary, they are abundant, and in many cases well pronounced. And the rocks of which the group consists, and to which a general allusion has already been made, are analogous to such as are to be found dispersed in other transition tracts. Thus, if the Older Stratified Rocks of North Devon be compared with those occurring in certain portionsof the South of Ireland, such analogies doubtless present themselves. There are these differences, however, between the two tracts; that a much greater diversity of rocks occurs in the broad expanse of the South of Ireland, than in the confined district of North Devon, including various conglomerates among the number (and in this respect corresponding likewise with the relations in the N.W. of Gloucestershire, and adjacent parts of Herefordshire*:) while, on the other hand, the organic remains distributed in the Old Stratified Rocks of North Devon appear to be much more abundant and in greater variety than I have noticed in any part of the South of Ireland. Now, admitting such analogies to exist, let us carry the comparison somewhat further, and see to what it leads. These rocks in the South of Ireland are overlaid in many instances by detached groups and mountain masses of the Old Red Sandstone formation, in decided unconformed position. The county of Waterford may be cited as affording numerous examples. And in none of these cases do we find anything like a passage from the transition series to the Old Red Sandstone formation above.
I have in numberless instances shown that in Ireland the Old Red Sandstone formation reposes on the Older Stratified Rocks, both of the transition and primary epochs, in discordant position. Nothing can be more abrupt and distinct than the unconformity of the Old Red Sandstone there displayed. And nowhere have I perceived any gradation between the Old Red Sandstone and the older rocks. 
  If then the Older Stratified Rocks of North Devon be allowed to bear analogy to those in the South of Ireland, the relations now stated appear to be conclusive as to their relative age; as to their being in fact both referable to an epoch antecedent to that of the Old Red Sandstone formation, and in nowise connected with the latter as terms of the same series.
And if such be the case, the same may be predicated of the Older Stratified Rocks of South Devon and Cornwall also, since similar relations are stated to exist in those districts as in North Devon. And this conclusion will bring us back to the position formerly entertained, and I believe correctly; namely, that a large portion of the Older Stratified Rocks of South Devon and Cornwall belong to the transition system. But to what portion of that system? it may be asked. The question implies the impression of a determinate order of succession in the transition series. Does such a sequence strictly prevail in nature, so as to admit of general application? I do not conceive that an affirmative reply would be correct, if we may judge by what we have hitherto learnt from the description of our own and other countries. And in avowing this persuasion, far be it from me to disparage in the slightest degree the assiduous and invaluable labours of Prof. Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison. The Silurian system of the latter cannot be too highly appreciated, as no doubt will also be the case with the Cambrian system of the former, whenever the public shall be gratified by the appearance of that work in all its details. As comprising an able development of the structure and composition of the districts described, together with the fossils by which they are characterized, as well as of the disturbing forces by which they have been affected, the Silurian system will always maintain a high rank in geology. Yet, if we duly consider the tumultuary throes under which the arrangements of the transition epoch appear in general to have taken place, and the consequent uncertain and fluctuating disposition of the mineral masses composing the system, with a distribution of organic remains much depending on the medium in which they are enveloped, as being of an argillaceous, calcareous, or siliceous nature, we can hardly expect to find that the local arrangements of one country should strictly correspond with those of another. I am persuaded that many general resemblances exist, but that a diversity prevails in the details of different tracts, both with respect to the composition and disposition of the mineral masses and the distribution of the remains of organized bodies. In this view we appear to be borne out by all that is hitherto known of the transition relations of Ireland, England, Scotland, Scandinavia, Russia, Poland, Germany, Belgium, France, or North America. However, let future and more extended inquiries decide this question. In the mean time it may be remarked that, while in these different countries many of the organic remains correspond as to species, yet peculiar species also occur in some of those tracts which have not yet been found in others. The comprehensive general views expressed under this head by Professor Sedgwick appear to me so truly just and appropriate, that the following extracts from his concluding words may be very appositely introduced in this place.
  "Some of the generalizations are, however, founded on imperfect evidence, and to render them more complete, it is now necessary to appeal to the organic remains in the several groups. In this department little has been yet effected, excepting in the higher part of the Silurian system, where the upper divisions (at least in one part of the island) assume definite mineralogical and zoological types. Whether definite geological groups can be made out in any lower system still remains to be seen. The difficulty of classification by organic remains increases as we descend, and is at length insurmountable; for in the lowest stratified groups, independently of metamorphic structure, all traces of fossils gradually vanish; and the great range of certain species through numerous successive groups, and the very irregular distribution of fossils even in some of the more fossiliferous divisions, adil greatly to the difficulties of establishing true definite groups even within the limits of our own island. The difficulties are indefinitely increased in comparing the formations of remote continents. But these circumstances are compensated by the magnificent scale of development of the successive groups, and their wide geographical distribution. Taken together they have a great unity of character. To these views, so clearly expressed, I fully subscribe.
Upon the whole, there appears to me no adequate reason for considering the Older Stratified Rocks of Devon otherwise than as a portion of the transition system; for the occurrence of certain fossil plants in the Wollacomb and Marwood bed of sandstone (subjacent to the Trilobite clayslate), even should they really be found to bear analogy to some that are met with in the coal-measures, does not seem sufficient to invalidate this conclusion. It is much to be desired that the fossil plants derived from the Marwood sandstone should undergo a rigorous examination as to the different genera and species of which they may consist, especially as the evidence hitherto given in respect of them is in some degree conflictive f. It may be remarked, however, of these sandstones, that among them none of the fern tribe have been met with, whilst these are of frequent occurrence among the Devon coal-measures. That fossil plants occur also in the South of Ireland, among the transition strata at Dunmore, in the county of Kerry, as noticed by the late Mr. Alexander Nimmo, 1 have already placed on record %; and I have to express my regret that I received that information subsequent to my visits to that part of the island. It is very desirable that some competent geologist should strictly examine that quarter, and give us the result of his researches. But in such an occurrence there appears to be no real novelty, as analogous relations have been stated to exist in some parts of the continent.
Should Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison, or Professor Phillips, as proposed, execute the plan of a full description and figuring of all the undescribed fossils met with in the Older Stratified Rocks of Devon and Cornwall, they will add greatly to the obligations already conferred on geology by their valuable labours. And with respect to North Devon, it may not be immaterial to bear in mind the observation of the former gentlemen, that some of the organic exuviae met with in the calcareous slates at Linton, which lie low down in the series, are specifically similar to others appearing in the uppermost part of the series, namely, in the Trilobite slates at Barnstaple f. This task, when accomplished, will put to the proof to what extent these tracts agree or disagree with other transition tracts hitherto described.
  In now turning again to Ireland, I do not advert particularly to the concluding paragraph of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison J (in which they refer to certain observations made in Ireland by Mr. Charles W. Hamilton), for this simple reason, that I do not clearly comprehend their application; and Mr. Hamilton’s paper I have not seen. There appears to me some confusion of terms in the case.
But Mr. Murchison having in his Silurian system, (pp. 580, 581,) indulged in some strictures in disparagement of the conclusions to which I had been led in the South of Ireland, I feel called upon to offer the following in reply; first giving the statement of the author.
The remarks of Mr. Murchison refer more particularly to the great band of limestone that stretches past Cork, which is intercalated among the transition rocks of that quarter; on which he observes, " Mr. Weaver arrives at the conclusion that a large number (between 60 and 70 species) of the fossils of the transition and carboniferous systems are identical. My zoological data and inferences are completely at variance with those of Mr. Weaver." That is, of course, taking the Silurian system as a standard measure of all other transition tracts. But it has already been seen that, however highly pleased with the Silurian system itself, I am not content to receive that system as an infallible guide when we step out of the Silurian region, and pass into other tracts of transition or protozoic origin.
Again, "Mr. J. de C. Sowerby is of opinion that all the fossils therein enumerated (p. 21.) as belonging to the transition limestone of Cork are, with one exception, characteristic fossils of the carboniferous limestone of England and Ireland, and therefore that they are of the same geological age as those which in another part of the memoir are described as exclusively belonging to the carboniferous strata." I must here remark that, not exclusively would have been a more correct expression, several of the species being there marked as common to transition countries also.
  "Judging from the printed lists, Prof. Phillips also thinks that the Cork limestone fossils are carboniferous." And "Mr. Sowerby agrees with me in believing that the only fossils alluded to by Mr. Weaver, which really belong to the more ancient rocks (Silurian, &c), are those enumerated (pp. 10. 15. et seq.)."
Again, "From an inspection of Mr.Weaver's map alone, I cannot avoid surmising that the localities where true Silurian fossils might occur, are those alone where such have really been detected, as the strata in those situations are separated from the.carboniferous limestone by large masses of Old Red Sandstone. (See Smerwick Harbour, &c, on the coast of Kerry, and the coast of Bonmahon River, Waterford.) The Old Red Sandstone, that important feature of separation, being wanting (on the south) in all the remainder of the country described, is it hazarding too much to suggest, that some of the limestones which there occur, and which are loaded with carboniferous fossils, may be outliers and remnants of the base of that system, which we know to be so vastly expanded and widely diffused throughout other parts of Ireland?"
The reader being thus put in possession of Mr. Murchison's view of the case, I must now entreat his attention to my own.
  I have to observe in the first place that the number of fossil species which 1 have enumerated as occurring in the Cork great band of limestone, is forty-eight,- of which twenty-five species are referable to the genera Spirifera, Terebratula, and Produeta.
2ndly, Of the other fossils there are seven species which have been found in the Cork limestone alone; namely, Nautilusfunatus, N.compresstiS; Euomphalus triangularis, E. ovalis; Ampullaria ovalis; a species of Solarium; Isocardia oblonga. 
  3rdly, But there are twenty-four species which occur both in the Cork band of limestone and other transition countries; of these, three species are included in Mr. Murchison's List of Silurian Fossils, derived from the Wenlock limestone, viz. at Ledbury and Dudley; and two of these occur also at Ptymouth, and one in the Eifel and Gothland: they are, Nerita spirata, Spirifera'radiata, and Spirifera octoplicata; and three others, also derived from the Wenlock limestone, viz. at Dudley, but not included in Mr. Murchison's list; and one of these is found at Blankenheim: viz. Spirifera striata, Euomphalus pentangularis, and E. calillus. Six other species in the Cork limestone are met with also in home transition localities; namely, in the Isle of Man, at Ludlow, Plymouth, and Newton Bushel; and three of them occur also in foreign transition countries, viz. in the Eifel, at Coblentz, and Blankenheim: they are, Pileopsis vetusta,- Product a Scotica,- Spirifera dista?is, S. cuspidata, S. rotundata , Terebratula pugnus: twelve other species occur in foreign transition countries, viz. Orthoceras striatum; Nautilus globatus, N. ovalus, Spirifera oblata, S. pinguis; Terebratula crumena, T. saccidus, T. lateralis, T. laevigata (Schlotheim), T. acuminata s Amplexus coralloides, Actinocrinites 30-dactylus: these foreign localities being Norway and Sweden, Christiania, Malmoe, Gothland, Hof, Schleitz, Blankenheim, Eifel, Coblentz, Bensberg, Ems, Mont Chatou near Coutances, and the Catskill Mountains in the state of New York; countries admitted to be of protozoic origin, and to which Mr. Murchison himself in a great measure refers, when giving an account of his Silurian corals, viz. Sweden, Gothland, Bensberg, Eifel, and the transition regions adjacent to the Rhine, both in Germany and Belgium; as also to Lake Erie and Drummond Island in North America.
4thly, But there are seventeen species in the Cork band of limestone, which have hitherto been noticed elsewhere only in the carboniferous limestone; viz. Asaphus gemmuliferus , Orthoceras Breynii, O.fisiforme ; Nautilus vudticarinatus, N. carini/erus, N. sulcatus , Ampullaria helicoidcs; Producia Martini, P. concinna, P. lobata, P. punctata, P. antiquata, P. plicatilis; Spirifera trigonalis; Terebratula resupinata, T. cordiformis; Pleurorhynchns hibernicus. 
  In further illustration of this subject, I also showed, in the notes to §. S3, of my Memoir on the South of Ireland, that of the genera Producta, Spirifera, and Terebratula, no less than eighteen other species had been observed, partly in other portions of the British Isles and partly in foreign countries, as common both to the transition and carboniferous systems; namely, Producta depressa, P. hxmispherica, P. longispina, P. sulcata, P. anomala, P. sarcinulata, P. scabricula s Spirifera glabra and obtusa, S. attenuata, S. ambigua, S. reticulata, S. decurrens, S. striatula; Terebratula Mantia, T. platyloba, T. plicatella, T. diodonta, T. afjinis; and the transition tracts to which these are referred are, at home, Dudley, Newton Bushel, Plymouth, and South of Ireland; and abroad, Christiania, Gothland, Eifel, Coblentz, Bensberg, Blankenheim, Ems; and Catskill Mountains, Albany, and Trenton Falls, in the State of New York.
There is no gainsaying these facts, the lists having been prepared with great care; and I consider Mr. Mnrchison not at all justified when he applies to this part of my memoir the following remark: " Still less can we admit the validity of arguments founded, either upon mere lists of fossils which may have often been erroneously identified, or simply upon the names attached to formations by geologists who have not studied the whole sequence of the deposits in question." (p. 580.)
With respect to the first part of this remark, bearing on the identification of species, foreign naturalists may not "receive it as any great compliment; but I confess I am not so sceptical myself as to undervalue their discriminating powers; at home, luckily, the identification will not be disputed, the principal authority referred to being Mr. J. de C. Sowerby. And with regard to the second part, relating to the formations in which these fossils have been found, the best answer that can be given is to point to the native and foreign localities which I nave already enumerated.
  I must also remark that Mr. Murchison does not correctly state the case when he represents thai some of the limestones in the south of Ireland are loaded with carboniferous fossils. The list given by me in §. 33. relates to the Cork great band of limestone described in §. 29. Of all the other bands, those described in §§. 22. to 28. inclusive, and in §§. 31. and 32. exhibit organic exuviae very sparingly ; the principal being Crinnidal remains, a few Spiriferae and Producta; (and among these the Producta depressa), an Avicula, a Goniatite, and very few Polyparia. But in the two bands of limestone, described in §. 30., which are interstratified with and flank the interposed mass of clayslate of which Rinhiskicldy Hill mainly consists, situated on the western side of the lower part of Cork harbour, fossils appear to be numerous; but no one, I believe, has hitherto given them that attention which they appear well to deserve. I trust some competent geologist will take the subject in hand.
  I must further observe, in reference to the last quoted remark of Mr. Murchison, that my conclusions were not founded upon mere lists of fossils, but upon their matrices forming regular intercalated beds in a decided transition country in the south of Ireland; relative position having, in all cases, been the primary consideration, both there and in the other native and foreign localities referred to.
  No doubt all this does not exactly correspond with the relations so ably developed in the Silurian System; but it tends to bear me out in my argument that, in widely extended, or distant separated, lands of protozoic origin, the relations, though akin, may not in all cases be precisely alike. If further proof were wanting, we have only to step across the Irish Channel, and enter Devon and Cornwall, where the relations, be it observed, appear to me to be much more nearly allied to the South of Ireland than with the districts described in the Silurian region. But the affinities are, perhaps, still stronger between the South of Ireland and the transition tracts bordering upon the Rhine, than with any of the English districts mentioned, if we may judge by what is already known of those tracts.
With one observation of Mr. Murchison I fully concur. "The only effective remedy," he remarks, "for the scepticism engendered by loose comparisons is to publish monographs, with figures of all the remains found in each group of deposits, the stratigraphical limits of which have been precisely defined by competent observers," p. 580.
  If Mr. Murchison and Prof. Sedgwick will do this, both with respect to the Devonian and Cornubian, and Cambrian protozoic departments, geology cannot fail to derive great advantage from their united scientific labours; and if some other zealous, active, and competent geologists will undertake and execute the same task in those quarters of Ireland not yet described, and complete the views in those that have not been minutely explored, we may hope eventually to see a constellation of Cambrian, Silurian, Devonian, and Hibernian Stars, shedding, so far at least, a clear and steady light upon the protozoic regions of our geological world.
The subject of Metamorphism having been touched upon in a preceding part of this paper, I am led, in conclusion, to ac'veit to the ingenious speculations of Professor Babbage and Sir John F. W. Herschelfj concerning the subterraneous oscillations of the isothermal surfaces of great temperature, founded on the assumption of an incandescent mass existing deep below the Surface of the Earth. If we adopt this theory, which appears to afford a fair starting-point, it may not be very difficult to conceive developments of heat in the bowels of the earth proportionate to the depths of the mineral deposits and the pressures to which they may have been subjected, during the progressive construction of the Shell of the Globe to its present form and state; but which differed in the degrees according to the conditions that prevailed at different epochs. That a portion of this pressure was due to an incumbent ocean cannot admit of doubt, since all mineral formations, from the fundamental granite upward to the most recent of the tertiary class, exhibit abundant phasnomena attesting this immergence.
  In all successive epochs, therefore, pending the building up of the Crust of the Earth to its existing form and condition, it mav be said that the combined or reacting agencies of heat and water have never been absent; though modified and varied in intensity and force according to the circumstances which interfered at given periods.
Hence it appears that we are not strictly justified in pronouncing rock formations, of whatever a?ra, as of purely igneous or of purely aqueous origin; for as in all cases heat and water have been conjointly or conflictively set in motion, it becomes, in any case, simply a question of the relatively greater or less intensity and energy with which their respective forces have been combined or nave reacted on each other; and as all formations of a date anteoedent to the post-diluvial were (if we except the lacustrine) formed adjacent to, in, or under the Ocean, their various conditions of position and structure, both general and subordinate, appear referable primarily to the laws of chemical and molecular attractions, modified by greater or less developments of heat and mechanical agency, under the influence of hydrostatic pressure.
During the progress of the formation of strata in the ocean, and the incidental raisings and subsidences to which they may have been subjected by elemental combinations or conflicts, fractures, disruptions, and dislocations would follow as a consequence; and such movements may, in some of their results, have given rise to the origin of many veins. Hence, a distinction between primary disposition and structure, and successive displacements, appears legitimate; comprehending under the term structure, all crystalline, stratified, and concretionary arrangements of whatever description; whether slaty, tabular, prismatic, globular, columnar, or otherwise.
Drawing then a distinction between original formation and contingent derangements, between primary construction and subsequent upraisings and depressions, if' we look to the terms of the series exhibited to us in the existing relations of the constituent masses of our Continents and Islands, the vast body of cumulative evidence supplied by the extended researches of geological observers in general, among whom the name of Lyell stands conspicuous, seem to leave little doubt that the solid materials of the Shell of our Globe have undergone oscillatory movements in elevation and depression in reference to the ievel of the sea. In some cases, these movements appear to have been gently and slowly, in others violently and rapidly progressive, while subject to alternating fits of comparative repose and energy, differing greatly in degree and extent; thus corresponding with the successive differences which are observable also in the position, composition, and structure of rocks, and in the remains of the organized beings by which they are respectively characterized.
But, in truth, let it be confessed, that, through whatever means or secondary causes, acting during the course of a vast Cyclef, the Great Architect of the Universe moulded the Surface of the Earth by successive stages into its existing form and condition, adapted to the habitation and purposes of man, a scene fitted for the exercise and cultivation of his moral and intellectual faculties: the full scope and application of those means, may in his present state of being always remain beyond the compass of his knowledge and understanding; although, seeing through a glass darkly, he be allowed to obtain partial glimpses of the truth, while engaged in the delightful task of endeavouring to trace the footsteps, and penetrate the benevolent designs, of the Creator, as manifested in His wonderful and infinite works.







