(1.) IN the following communication I propose to give a sketch of the mineral constitution of the South of Ireland, including the county of Clare and extending to the Bay of Galway. Connected with the description which I formerly gave of the Eastern portion of the Island, the two memoirs will embrace about two thirds of the area comprised in its surface. In this, as in the former account, I shall confine myself to the more striking geological phenomena offered by the tracts described; presenting occasional details in illustration, but avoiding all theoretical speculation.
  (2.) The annexed Map (see Plate II.), with the sections drawn through different portions of the tract (see Plate i. figs. 1 to 5.), and the general views of the principal chain (see Sketches (a) and (b) in Plate i.), may serve to illustrate the general forms, structure, and connection of the mountain and hilly ranges with each other. In determining the geographical limits of the formations I have endeavoured to be exact.
(3.) The Southern and greater portion of our field of inquiry, is composed of a transition tract; its northern boundary being formed, both in the eastern and western quarters, by carboniferous limestone associated, more or less, with the old red sandstone; while in the central part of the border, a coal country is found directly conjoining with the transition series. The old red sandstone both on the east and west, as well as in the northern portion of the field, attains to considerable elevation, passing in its descent beneath the more level surface of the carboniferous limestone; and the limestone here, as in other parts of Ireland, is surmounted by an elevated and extensive tract of coal measures.
(4.) The surface of the transition district consists chiefly of chains of mountains and hills, having generally a direction from W. to E.; and the principal, rising in Iveragh, south of Dingle bay, in the county of Kerry, attains its greatest elevation in Mac-Gillicuddy's Reeks, thence extending eastward through the county of Cork between the rivers Lee and Blackwater. The less elevated ranges being nearly parallel to this main chain and to each other, longitudinal valleys are inclosed between them, the course of which is indicated by the principal streams; but as sinuous valleys, dells, and defiles traverse the chains, the region presents on the whole a considerably diversified aspect.
  (5.) All the elevations given in the following List marked (N.) were ascertained by the late Mr. Alexander Nimmof; those derived from the Trigonometrical Survey of Ireland, marked (T.), I owe to the urbanity of Colonel Colby, R. E., by whose directions they were furnished to me by Captain Portlock, R. E.
  Thenceforward, through the Bogra and Neagles mountains, with the Watergrass hills, spreading between the rivers Lee and Blackwater, and extending to the eastward, this principal range declines gradually in elevation. In the Neagles range, Knockbena Skeagh is, according to the Trigonometrical Survey, 1388 feet above the sea.
  On the south of this main chain, and beyond the river Lee, high land still prevails, yet forming lower ranges, the surface of which is undulated from north to south ; but in the disposition of these ranges a similar declension in altitude from west to east is observable, the principal elevations being found adjacent to the west and south coast. Hungry Hill, on the north side of Bantry Bay, is, according to the Trigonometrical Survey, 2,249 feet above the level of the sea.
North of the parallel of the Lakes of Killarney and the river Blackwater, the coal country of the counties of Kerry, Cork, and Limerick presents more equally flowing outlines in its surface, which may be compared to a series of complex undulations upon a large scale, in which the higher portions vary between 1000 and 700 feet, and the lower between 500 and 300 feet, above the level of the sea; but Tour mountain, situated in this tract north-west of Newmarket, is according to the Trigonometrical Survey elevated 1329 feet above that level.
The boggy district between Killarney and Millstreet is, in the central parts, between 500 and 400 feet, and at the eastern and western extremities 300 feet, while the lower lake at Killarney is 50 feet, above the level of the sea, and in its deepest part 190 feet below that level, its extreme depth from the surface being 240 feet.
Proceeding more to the north, the following heights have been determined by the Trigonometrical Survey of Ireland:
  Geological Relations, and Distribution of the Subject. 
  (6.) In the general relations of the transition tract of the South of Ireland great analogy is found to subsist. To prevent repetition, I propose to take a few examples as types, selecting them in the eastern and western extremities of the tract, in which the greater diversity is observable; namely, in the county of Kerry, the adjacent portions of Cork, and the south coast of the county of Waterford, adding incidentally such further observations as may conduce to the fuller understanding of the whole of the transition field, and which may more particularly appear when I proceed to speak of its metalliferous relations. The carboniferous series of Munster, extending from the old red sandstone upward to the coal formation inclusive, may be conveniently considered under two heads: 1. The South Munster, embracing portions of the counties of Cork, Limerick, and Kerry; and 2. The North Munster, appearing in the county of Clare, and extending thence in part into the county of Galway. But though separated at the surface by the Shannon, these two fields are assuredly connected with each other beneath that river.
I. TRANSITION SERIES. In Kerry, Cork, and Waterford (7) The county of Kerry comprises rocks of great variety of character, which, though relatively of unequal continuity and distribution, are yet so perfectly inosculated as to constitute a persistent series. Their general range is E. and W., subject to inflections from that line. The dip is interchangeably N. or S., the angle of inclination fluctuating from the vertical to the horizontal nearly. From this arrangement artees a succession of ridges and troughs; the ridges containing a central axis of vertical beds, from which the lateral strata diminish in elevation on each side, while in the troughs are inclosed other beds which gradually approach to the vertical position in the centre of the trough. These variations in the line of range and dip occupy spaces of greater or less extent; but independently of this general disposition, involutions and contortions of the strata are also occasionally observable.
  (8.) Though the rocks of this portion of Ireland present great differences in aspect and structure, the principal masses may, in a great measure, be referred to compounds of quartz and slate variously intermingled and associated. Limestone, another principal mass, also oilers considerable varieties, and upon its confines with other rocks, it is found more or less charged with a portion of their ingredients. In generalizing the view, the country may be considered as chiefly composed of grey wacke, slate, and limestone.
  To be more particular, we may designate the whole series as consisting of simple and compound rocks. The simple rocks are clay-slate, quartz-rock, hornstone, lydian-stone, and limestone.
The clay-slate is bluish, greenish, scldomer blackish grey, often brownish, reddish or purplish, mod glimmering, or glistening, more rarely wholly dull. In some quarters the slate appears as a quartzy clay-slate, and in others as a shivery shale.
  Quarlz-rock, generally of various shades of greyish white, more or less compact and fine splintery, or granular; sometimes also reddish, bluish, or greenish, when coloured by an intimate mixture of the substance of clay-slate.
  Hornstone, or chert, yellowish, reddish, or greyish white, compact, even, and fine splintery.
Lydian-stone of its usual aspect, but sometimes passing into flinty slate.
  Limestone of various shades, from dark to light bluish grey, also pale grey with streaks of reddish and yellowish white, more rarely black; and in structure varying from compact to sublamellar.
The limestone in some quarters forms frequent alternations with the lydian-stone, hornstone, and quartz-rock, involving in its substance also shapeless portions of those rocks, for example—in several of the beautiful isles of the Lower Lake at Killarney, in some of which, as in Ross Island, beds of clay-slate are likewise interposed in the series; and in Muckruss peninsula, both on its northern and southern shores, the limestone may be observed alternating with slate and greywacke slate, where it borders upon rocks of that description. In other quarters the limestone is leas interrupted, appearing in purer beds which afford excellent lime, e. g. in the Drishane quarries near Millstreet, or being deteriorated by a commixture of siliceous particles become less tractable, e.g. in the limestone of the Kenmare district.
  (9.) The compound rocks may be enumerated under the following heads: clay-slate conglomerate, quartz conglomerate, grey wacke, and grey wacke slate, sandstone conglomerate, sandstone, and sandstone slate, greenstone, and hornstone porphyry. Of these the greywacke, greywacke slate, sandstone, and sandstone slate compose the predominant rocks, the coarse conglomerates being- of more casual distribution, for example, the sandstone conglomerate in Dunloe Pass west of the lower lake of Kiliarney Greenstone, and hornstone porphyry, are more local occurrences: the former may be observed in Begnish Isle adjacent to Valentia Island, and the latter within the range of Mac-Gillicuddy's Reeks. In the general series of these rocks, the purer clay-slate, fit for roofing, occurs in beds incidentally distributed and of variable thickness, yet bearing but a small proportion to the entire mass, e. g. the indifferent, bluish and greenish slates procured from Mangerton and Glen Flesk, and the reddish brown from Dunloe Pass; but in the island of Valentia an excellent roofingslate is obtained, which may vie with any for firmness and durability, possessing also an agreeable subdued purplish colour. Bed&of quartz-rock, hornstone, and lydian-stone, also occur incidentally in the general, compound series; but the last-named substance is comparatively very rare in the grey wacke and slate country, its more usual representative being there a flinty slate.
(10.) The common character of the clay-slate conglomerate and greyvvacke is that of a base of slate or quartzy slate, enveloping rounded and angular fragments of quartz and slate (sometimes in the form of considerable pebbles) but very rarely inclosing small portions of felspar also. The greywacke slate is the same rock, of finer grain and fissile structure. Numerous scales of silvery mica enter also more or less largely into the composition of these rocks, as wellas occasionally into that of the purer clay-slates.
  A great variety of these substances, together with some sandstone conglomerate, may be observed on the coast adjacent to Smerwick harbour, beds of clay-slate also appearing in the association. The beds in this quarter dip 65° to 80° S.; but in traversing the peninsula southward, to the confines of Dingle bay, they gradually acquire a vertical position, then a northerly inclination, and re-assuming a vertical position, they again acquire the southerly dip. In the Cahir-conree chain a disposition somewhat similar may be observed: thus in the northern face of the eastern quarter, where the Slieve-Meesh range may be said to commence and in which old red sandstone prevails, strata of sandstone appear, including some of conglomerate dipping 50° to 45° to the north; but on penetrating into the mountains on the south by the valley which runs about two miles and a half in that direction, its mouth fronting Kilgobbin, these sandstone strata may be observed gradually merging into varieties of greywacke and greywacke slate, associated with red, brown and greenish coloured clay-slate, and with occasional beds of similarly coloured sandstone; the series progressively rising at a higher angle until they become vertical, while still further south a successive interchange of dip takes place in these beds, analogous to that already noticed as occurring throughout the transition field. To the eastward, this series is overlaid by the old red sandstone of Slieve Meesh, which forms a flatly arched inflection from north to south; but at its eastern foot the greywacke re-appears adjacent to the river Maine.
  In various parts of the country, the basis of the fine-grained greywacke is found occasionally to effervesce partially with acids, though no calcareous matter be obvious to the eye. Such, however, does casually appear when approaching the limestone, and sometimes even at the distance of one or more miles.
  In the quartz conglomerate, the basis being quartz, the ingredients are analogous to those of the clay- slate conglomerate. In the sandstone conglomerate also the larger included portions are essentially composed of quartz and slate, the former being usually white or grey, but sometimes tinged reddish or greenish; while the basis consists of compact, granular or sandy quartz, numerous scales of silvery mica, and an occasional diffusion of white earth, like that which proceeds from decomposed felspar. From this coarse compound, a gradual transition may be traced to the finer-grained sandstone and sandstone of a slaty structure, and thence, by the greater consolidation of quartzose matter, into quartz-rock itself.
This gradation may be seen exemplified in the entrance of Dunloe Pass, where all these rocks possess more or less a reddish or brownish tint, agreeing in that respect with the neighbouring clay-slate. Those which are first encountered dip at an angle of 60° to the S., which angle they retain until we find a bed of the sandstone conglomerate in juxta-position with a reddish roofing-slate, the latter dipping 63° S. at the point of contact, but at a distance from the conglomerate (being about 70 yards thick) gradually assuming the vertical position. Further S. the beds decline to as low angles as 35° and 30°,—then undulate on a small scale for some distance, and subsequently resume the southerly dip at a higher angle. But from Dunloe Pass to Kenmare Bay, though the more general disposition of the strata be to the S., an occasional change of dip toward the N. is also observable, vertical strata in such cases commonly intervening.
(11.) I may here remark that in the whole extent of the greywacke and slate country, contemporaneous veins of quartz are more or less common to the several members of that series, most usually traversing them in the line of the dip.
(12.) It will be seen in the Map, that the distribution of the limestone is very unequal in the general expanse of the transition field, the interposed masses not assuming a regular form ; yet the strata are always parallel to those of the rocks with which the limestone is in contact; and within the limestone ranges, the stratification is occasionally subject to inflections and variations in the line of dip, as well as to contortions, analogous to those within the grey wacke and slate tracts, the scale of these changes of curvature also varying. An example of this kind may be seen, to the best advantage, on the western side of the Isle of Innisfallen, in the Lower Lake of Killarney, when the lake is at its lowest level, as well as in some of the adjacent islands.
(13.) In the series of the grey wacke, sandstone, and slate country now described, I have to notice the organic remains which have occurred to me. Those found in the transition limestone will be afterwards considered under that head. The only quarter in Kerry, in which 1 discovered numerous organic remains in the greywacke and slaty rocks, is situated on the western coast near Ferriter's Cove, adjoining Smerwick harbour. They are there distributed in slate and fine-grained greywacke, which occasionally effervesce with acids, though no carbonate of lime be perceptible to the eye; the petrifactions themselves appearing either as mere impressions, or as casts of the interior, composed of the substance of the rock, namely, of slaty matter, fine-grained greywacke, &c. 
Among these I observed the Calymene Blumenbachii (Brongniart, pi. 1. fig. l.) and apparently also the Asaphus caudatus (Brongniart, pi. 2. fig. 4.), an Orthoceras, Euomphalus, two turbinated shells, one being carinated, the other striated, and a Natica; and other Terebratulae, as well as a Pentamerus Sow. 
Several of these casts so perfectly resemble both in the species of the original shell and in composition, similar casts occurring in the Tortworth transition district in Gloucestershire, which I formerly described, that on examining them they might be supposed to have been derived from thence. In both districts the Turbinolia celtica is common. Some of the casts are also identical with fossils figured by Sir Alexander Crichton as occurring in the transition grey wacke and slate of the Duchy of Nassau. In addition to these remains I have to state that the late Mr. Alexander Nimmo found in the slate, adjacent to Dunmore Head, impressions of plants, which, according to his description, would appear to be referable to Calamites.
Organic remains are also visible in the greywacke, which protrudes from beneath the old red sandstone at the eastern foot of Slieve Meesh (§ 10), forming a low ridge which crosses the river Maine, and extends some distance beyond it. On the right bank of that river, in the lands of Riversville, a quarry, which has been opened eight feet deep, exhibits beds of fine-grained greywacke, from two to six inches thick, with slight layers of slate interposed in the lower part, but alternating in the upper with beds of clay-slate and limestone, from four to six or eight inches thick, the whole dipping 12° to 15° to the E. of S. The organic exuviae being closely entangled with the rock, are best discerned where the latter is partially decomposed, and the most common appeared referable to Producta, Spiriferae, Terebratulae, Favosites, and Crinoidea.
On the eastern side of Ireland, namely, on the banks of the Oom-boy river, which flows into Cork harbour, Mr. Nimmo informed me that Orthoceratites and other organic remains are also to be met with in the slate; and Mr. S. Wright, of Cork, assures me that he has frequently seen small Orthoceratites in the clay-slate near the town of Cove in Cork harbour; also Spirifene or Terebratulae in the slate on the Bandon road, five miles south from Cork, but not sufficiently distinct to admit of the identification of species.
(14.) In tracing the transition rocks from Kerry into the counties of Cork and Waterford, an analogous structure and composition are everywhere perceptible, diversified, however, by numerous varieties; one member also sometimes prevailing more than another in the series. Of this disposition the unequal bands of limestone which pervade the tract, as well as the isolated patches more locally distributed, are sufficient exemplifications. The general observation may also be made, that the conglomerated structure, and the reddish or brownish hue are more particularly developed in the greywacke and slate rocks which occur north of the'parallel of the river Lee; while in the parallel to the south of that river the same class of rocks exhibits commonly a finer structure and a light bluish or greenish grey cast; but both parallels contain incidentally the other modifications which have been noticed.
(15.) The transition rocks on the south coast of the county of Waterford extend from the vicinity of Dungarvan toward Tramore. As they exhibit a series of considerable interest, I shall here subjoin such an account of them as may help to complete our view of the modified structure and association of the general series.
  Clay-slate.—1. More or less pure, and partly glossy; blackish, bluish, greenish, or yellowish grey; also reddish brown or purplish. These slates contain more or less numerous scales of silvery mica disposed parallel to the laminae. The blackish slates are partly aluminous. 2. Quartzy clay-slate containing some crystals of felspar. 8. Quartzy clay-slate containing finely disseminated hornblende, and sometimes also crystals of glassy felspar. 4. Clay-slate very firm, yet fissile, partly porphyritic.
Greywacke.—1. Slate enveloping crowded grains of quartz as large as peas, portions of the paste consisting also of green steatite. 2. Slate or quartzy slate inclosing angular and rounded grains of quartz, with small fragments of slate, and numerous scales of silvery mica, and with or without grains of felspar. S. Greywacke slate, the same rock as the preceding, but of fine grain and slaty structure. 4. A fine-grained base, compounded of slate and quartz, containing isolated, round grains of white quartz, of the size of large peas, the rock at a distance appearing like an amygdaloid.
Quartz-rock.—1. In its simple forms. 2. Containing small globules of chlorite, and also particles of hornblende, from the partial decomposition of which it acquires an ochreous aspect. 3. Quartzrock (sometimes graduating into hornstone, or partially into compact felspar), containing numerous reddish and yellowish white crystals of felspar, forming a handsome porphyry; sometimes containing also particles of hornblende. 4. Quartz-rock (sometimes merging into hornstone), in wJiich are disseminated crystals of yellowish white felspar, and also crystals and globular portions of brownish grey vitreous quartz, and a few scales of mica. 5. A base of quartz, coloured by clay-slate, and partially also by hornblende or chlorite; a compact greenish grey, or greyish green rock, containing incidentally particles of hornblende and crystals of glassy felspar, and sometimes Tains of vitreous quartz. Without attention it may be confounded with greenstone.
  Ifornttone.—1. In its simple forms, splintery or conchoidal. 2. Containing crystals of glassy felspar, or flesh-coloured crystals of felspar, or both conjointly, forming a handsome porphyry. The base is often of a yellowish, and sometimes of a hair-brown colour, and in the base a portion of steatite is sometimes diffused, and the rock then becomes unctuous to the touch. 3. Hornstone forming the base of the compound described under the head of Quartz-rock No. 4.
Quartz Conglomerate and Hornstone Conglomerate, coarse- and fine-grained.—A base of quartz or hornstone (or partially of compact felspar), much incorporated with steatite, and thus acquiring a saponaceous feel, and containing crystals both of dull and glassy felspar; as does also the green steatite when appearing in a distinct form, which is frequently the case. This base envelopes numerous fragments of quartz, hornstone, and hornstone porphyry, those of the two latter varying sometimes from the smallest size to that of blocks of one and two feet in diameter.
Red Conglomerate, Red Sandstone, and Red Sandy Slate.—These all contain numerous scales of silvery mica. The conglomerate and sandstone are compounded principally of rounded and angular fragments of quartz and red slate, connected by a basis of similar composition but smaller grain, or by a simple base of quartz or reddish slate. In the mixture some grains of decayed felspar may also be incidentally observed. The compound is sometimes greyish as well as reddish coloured. The ingredients in the conglomerate rarely exceed the size of cherries, but sometimes extend to that of turkey's eggs, and even a man's head, in magnitude. When the slaty basis predominates, a sandy slate is formed. These beds are sometimes associated with irregular masses and beds of quartz, from an inch to one, two, and three feet wide, which bear a great quantity of beautiful, deep green chlorite.
  Greenstone and Compact Felspar.—1. Compact greenstone, a base of compact felspar, coloured greenish grey by hornblende, and containing particles or crystals of hornblende, and sometimes also crystals of felspar, thus appearing as a porphyry. The felspar base acquires a white aspect by weathering. 2. Sub-crystalline greenstone, a confused intermixture of greenish grey glassy felspar with hornblende, being also spotted with blackish green hornblende. 3. Compact reddish brown or purplish felspar, partially intermingled with chlorite, or green steatite, and containing also minute crystals of glassy felspar. 4. Greenstone conglomerate, a base of greenstone, enveloping portions of greenstone, mostly of an angular form.
The sub-crystalline greenstone seldom occurs in a distinct form on this coast. The compact greenstone, which more generally prevails, exhibits a difference of character according to the state in which the hornblende enters into the composition, the greater or less prevalence of siliceous matter, and the intimate blending of chlorite. If the hornblende be unaltered, the rock is rugged and stony; if partially decomposed it is saponaceous. It is probably to this unequally affected state of the hornblende that the unequal state of aggregation in the greenstone is partly due; and that one portion consisting of comparatively loose materials is found serving as a base to numerous harder portions which are embodied in it; a difference ascribable to disturbance during the process of concretion. In places, the compact greenstone merges into quartz-rock, deeply coloured by chlorite.
Red Sandstone Conglomerate, and Greenstone Conglomerate.—When the red sandstone and the greenstone beds come in contact, a gradation may be traced in 'some places from the one rock to the other, through the medium of a conglomerate, the extreme links of the chain being the following: 1. A basis of fine-grained red sandstone, enveloping rounded and angular fragments of red conglomerate and sandstone, and of greenstone, the two former exceeding the latter in quantity. 2. A base of compact greenstone, inclosing rounded and angular fragments of greenstone, and of red sandstone, the former predominating. In both conglomerates, the included fragments occur from a small size to that of a child's.head.
The crystals noticed in the preceding varieties of clayslate, quartz-rock, hornstone, greenstone, and compact felspar, appear to be of contemporaneous formation with the rock itself, possessing angles sharp and well defined.
(16.) The rocks thus described form beds intimately connected with each other by direct association, gradations, and repeated alternations, but without any specific order of succession or continuity. Their range is east and west yet subject to inflections from the line, while the dip changes from the north to the south, the beds being commonly at an angle approaching the vertical; but in the most eastern part of this coast, trending toward Tramore bay, they are inflected to a much greater extent, and partially disposed at a low angle of inclination.
Between the river Bonmahon and the bay of Ballydoan situated two miles west, there are fewer varieties of rock exhibited than occur more west and north of that bay. In the bay itself, the immediate association of the red sandstone and greenstone beds is well exemplified, in double alternation ; and in the line of contact between the two rocks may be observed those graduations from the one into the other, through the medium of the compound conglomerates, which I have just described. North of these beds varieties of slate are found, alternately'with greywacke, quartz-rock, hornstone, red sandstone, and conglomerate, and containing subordinate beds of greenstone, with the porphyritic varieties of the rocks which I have described. This arrangement is well exposed, in the western continuation of this coast, extending toward Dungarvan. To the eastward of the river Bonmahon the composition is analogous, with this exception, that no red conglomerate appears on that part of the coast, forming a portion of this transition series; it probably, however, occurs inland, as indications of red slate are there observable. More east upon this coast, the steatitic varieties of hornstone and conglomerate are, in particular, well displayed near Annestown, to the east of Kean Head.
(17.) Disseminated iron pyrites is not uncommon in the transition rocks of this coast, particularly in the blackish and bluish slates, which, by mutual decomposition, form sulphates of aluminc and iron, giving rise to extended exudations, which spread over the face of the cliffs in dirty brown yellow, and white streaks. It rarely occurs, however, in the red conglomerate and red sandstone. These are more especially distinguished by the diffusion of the red and yellow oxides of iron, which substances frequently occupy their interstices.
(18.) Numerous veins of quartz are found in all the rocks of the transition series on this coast, and of calcareous spar in most of them. They are, however, least frequent in the red conglomerate and red sandstone. Veins of hornstone also often traverse several of the rocks, in some places pursuing a very tortuous course. All these veins vary from a thread to four, six, or eight inches in width, and rarely exceed a breadth of one or two feet, frequently ramifying, and terminating in filaments. Marry of them are wholly barren and discontinuous; but others, whether consisting simply of quartz, or of calcareous spar, or a compound of both, bear copper and lead ores, either separately or conjointly; those bearing copper ores separately being the most common. Where these ores occur, the face of the cliffs is generally stained with blue and green streaks, arising from the decomposition of the sulphurets of copper.
(19.) In one portion of this district I met with organic remains, namely, immediately eastward of the lionmahon river, both upon the coast and inland, disposed in fine-grained grey wacke and grey wacke slate. In the former quarter they appear in the face of a cliff, which consists of coarse slate, the cleavage planes of which are nearly vertical; but the organic remains form a number of parallel lines, arranged in an horizontal position, thus traversing the fissile structure of the rock, and constituting so many layers, at the distance of three to six inches apart, a disposition which might give rise to some curious speculation. This deposit occupies a considerable portion of the face of the cliff upward, though in length rt extends only about twelve fathoms. I must remark, however, that the organic remains are not wholly confined to these parallel lines,occurring also scattered through the mass of the rock. They here consist of three or four species of Polyparia, several bivalves, and a Turbo; but inland I found, in addition to these, the Asaphus caudatus, and the whole may bear a strict comparison with similar remains in Kerry, Gloucestershire, &c, hysterolites, or the casts of bivalves, also appearing among the number, and closely resembling those figured by Messrs. Phillips and Woods as occurring at the summit of Snowdon.
(20.) Generally speaking, this transition series is connected, on the north, by insensible gradations with the great body of clay-slate which prevails in that part of the county of Waterford, the whole sustaining, upon the higher lands, unconformably, extended overlying masses and caps of the old red sandstone2, and on the flanks partial borders of the same formation, the latter supporting the carboniferous limestone in conformable position in those quarters.
(21.) Turning now our attention to the bands and isolated masses of limestone which are included in the transition tract, I may remark, that the greater part of these limestones are continuous in the mass, yet appear interlaminated or interstratified with the slaty rocks wherever exposed on their confines with the latter. A remarkable feature attending most of these bands of limestones is, that they occupy the line of valleys or dells, being flanked on each side by elevated ranges of greywacke and slaty rocks. They seem to belong to some of the oldest of the transition class, the species of organic remains which they contain being, so far as my experience extends, not many in number, and being also sparingly and partially distributed. The close researches of Mr. S. Wright in the Cork limestones lead to the same conclusion, as will fully appear in the sequel.
(22.) To the north of the road between Skibbereen and Ross is a calcareous district, extending about three miles in length and one to one and a half miles in width, consisting of isolated elliptical masses of bluish grey limestone, arranged in somewhat of an echelon order in grey clay-slate, the latter being also partly calcareous when adjoining the limestone. An analogous deposit exists also on the western side of Courtmacsherry bay; in these I observed only crinoidal remains and a few bivalves.
About three miles north of Bantry town, and adjacent to the narrow inlet from the sea, called Reenadunagan Lake, is a band of grey limestone, about one quarter of a mile wide, which has been traced upon the range some little distance to the eastward. It lies in pale bluish-grey, glossy clay-slate, arranged in strata from one to one and a half feet thick where continuous; but on its confines with the slate on the south, it is interlaminated with the latter in»layers only a few inches thick, all dipping 45° to the south at the point of contact; while in receding, both north and south, the beds gradually acquire a higher inclination. The thinner layers of limestone are usually compact, and the thicker granularly foliated, the latter appearing compounded of the comminuted fragments of crinoidal remains. I did not observe any bivalve.
(23.) At the head of the bay of Kenmare is a limestone district, which extends to the east and west of the town of Kenmare, being about ten miles long, and from a half to a quarter of a mile broad, and confined to the right bank of the river Rought and the bay of Kenmare. At its western extremity, on the townland of Reens, it gradually narrows to a point on the north shore of the bay, yet extends through the adjacent islands of Cappanacus and Dunkerrin. The limestone strata appear continuous throughout, and nearly rectilinear in their course, with a dip uniformly to the southward at angles from 75° to 80° except on the northern side of the western extremity, where they partially dip to the north, but at the same high angle, vertical strata probably intervening. In the adjoining slate and greywacke country, both on the northern and southern sides of the limestone, analogous, corresponding variations in the dip are likewise to be observed. In this limestone, organic exuviae are very sparingly distributed, consisting of a few bivalves with some crinoidal remains.
(24.) In the Killarney limestone district, the southern and eastern parts of Muckruss peninsula, consist of blue limestone in nearly continuous strata. North and west of the continuous band, the limestone alternates with thin layers of slate and greywacke slate, and still further north, where beds of compact, fine-grained, greywacke predominate, the beds of limestone gradually disappear. In the region of Muckruss mine, the limestone strata dip about 70° to the southward, but further south they gradually acquire as low an angle as 30°. Bivalves and fragments of Crinoidea occur in the Muckruss limestone, and in the adjacent slate and greywacke slate, but they are confined to a few species. They are incidentally met with also in the limestone of the vicinage of Killarney, being, however, rare in proportion to the greater quantity of siliceous matter in that rock. Indeed, in those parts where the calcareous repeatedly alternate with the siliceous beds, scarcely the vestige of a shell is to be seen ; for example, in the greater part of Ross Island and in some of the adjacent islands.
(25.) It is not improbable that a connexion subsists between the Killarney transition limestone and that which appears in the Drishane quarries near Millstreet, traces of limestone having been observed in the boggy tract which intervenes. The Millstreet band ranges south of the Blackwater river, past Clonemeen to the east of Roskeen bridge, terminating at a short distance from the latter in the greywacke and slate country. In most places it is amorphous, but where the strata are distinctly developed, they dip to the south, at angles varying from 45° to 70°, yet subject to curvatures, corresponding with those in the adjacent greywacke and slaty rocks. This limestone is generally of a light colour, and it exhibits few distinct organic reliquiae, the chief or most characteristic being a species of Avicula, assembled casually in interlaced groups, forming a thin separate layer.
(26.) The band of light-coloured limestone which ranges from the east of Aglish past Tallow to Castle Lyons on the west, may be seen adjacent to the first-named village, reposing on and alternating with clay-slate, both formations, where in contact, dipping to the southward at an angle of 45°, and containing the Producta depressa, some Spiriferae, Polyparia, and crinoidal remains. The broken portions of Crinoidea are very frequent in the limestone. The general range of the conjoining slaty and other rocks on the northern gide dip to the south, and on the southern side to the north, commonly at high angles, to which the limestone appears to conform, its more central strata approaching the vertical position, as may be observed in the Tallow district.
  On the northern side of this limestone band, in the range of hills which extends eastward to the southern part of Dungarvan harbour, may be observed numerous varieties of greyvvacke, sandstone, quartz-rock, and slate, frequently of a reddish brown hue, also of a yellowish or whitish cast, the sandstone and greywacke affording, in some places, tolerable freestone for building purposes. Many coarse conglomerates occur also in the series, containing fragments and pebbles of considerable size.
(27.) Proceeding S. from Aglish to Clashmore, a distance of about five miles, the slaty rocks undergo interchanges of the dip from N. to S., and again to the N., vertical strata intervening. Between Clashmore and Ballyhenny we cross a band of limestone about half a mile wide, which ranges nearly two miles E. and W., included in clay-slate, these rocks all dipping in conformity 75° to the N. The slate is partly interlaminated with the limestone, where it underlies the latter. Lydian-stone occurs occasionally in the limestone, in layers a few inches thick, and also in interspersed portions. The latter rock is mostly dark bluish grey, containing chiefly small fragments of crinoidal remains and of some few bivalves. At a little distance S.E. of Ballyhenny limestone quarry, roofing-slate is raised.
(28.) To the N. of the town of Yougball is a band of light-coloured limestone, which, proceeding from the vicinity of Clasheen on the W. past Kilnatoara Castle and river, seems to cross the harbour, reappearing on the E. in Pilltown, and extending thence to the small bay of the sea situated to the N. of Ardmore Head. It may average half a mile in width, and both at Pilltown and Kilnatoara Castle quarries the strata dip 80° to 85° to the N., or approach the vertical. The slaty rocks immediately north of this limestone dip south, and on the south to the north, but in both cases at high angles; while still further north and south the dips are interchangeable, so that the general series may be considered as nearly vertical. In the Pilltown limestone are few well-marked organic remains, and they are chiefly crinoidal, as also in that of Kilnatoara. In the latter I did not observe a single bivalve, but I obtained a broken portion of what appears to be a Goniatite of Von Buch.
(29.) South of Youghall we enter upon the principal band of limestone contained in the transition tract, extending from Youghall Bay on the east, past Carrigtohill and Cork to Castlemore on the west. In this range the limestone, after reaching the upper part of Cork harbour, occupies the smaller islands in that quarter, together with the northern points of Cove Island, thence pursues its western course on the south side of the Lee to the confluence of that river with the Bride, then lines both banks of the latter stream for a short distance, while the remainder of its course is confined to the right bank, terminating at about a quarter of a mile to the west of Castlemore Castle, or nearly fifteen miles west from Cork. This band in its broadest part, on the east, is between four and five miles wide, while at Castlemore, on the west, it is reduced to about half a mile in breadth. Flanked throughout by hilly ranges of slaty and greywacke rocks, the general dip is to the south, varying chiefly between angles of 70° and 80°, yet often approaching the vertical, and in some parts exhibiting a counterdip to the north. These relations may be distinctly observed, in traversing the bounding slaty rocks and the limestone from north to south, in different portions of the range, both to the east and the west of Cork harbour. The limestone is generally light-coloured and continuous, free from foreign beds, and the few organic remains I have seen in it were chiefly crinoidal.
(30.) A similar arrangement is observable in the parallel band of limestone, which, proceeding from the sea on the east, passes through the vale of Cloyne to Cork harbour, where itoccupies the northern part of Spike Island, the southwestern point of Cove Island, the whole of Rocky Island, and the isles of Haul* bowline and Rinniskiddy; thence passing to the main land, it composes the projecting points of the coast as well as the strand of Rinniskiddy village, and proceeding west, it passes by Shanavally and Hawksglen to Shannon Park. The interlamination of this band of limestone on its southern side, with the adjacent clayslate of Rinniskiddy hill, is distinctly seen in the rocks upon the strand, all approaching the vertical position, yet dipping south. The great body of Rinniskiddy hill is composed of clayslate, corresponding with the southern part of Spike Island; but in passing round the former along the strand, we find toward its southern side, the slate containing, at considerable intervals, discontinuous layers of limestone, each a quarter or half an inch wide. Further south these beds become more frequent and thicker, until they exceed those of the clayslate in dimensions and number, and in the more southern portion of the hill are nearly continuous. We have thus entered upon another parallel band of limestone, which ascends about halfway up the southern face of Rinniskiddy hill, and occupies the flat of the inlet below, ranging to the westward by Coolmore to Carrigoline; and to the eastward it apparently passes under the sea to Corkabeg, terminating1 there in a low promontory, which extends from the mainland on the eastern side of the lower harbour, being situated to the north of Carlisle Port. The clayslate, interlaminated with the limestone both on the northern and southern sides of Rinniskiddy hill, contains the same organic remains as the latter rock, and the series of strata deserves strict examination from those, whose local residence may afford the requisite leisure and opportunity. The fossils I met with were mostly indistinct. All these rocks dip conformably to the south.
(31.) In the ranges of clayslate hills which occupy the district on the south of the limestone of the vale of Cloyne, is an isolated but parallel band of limestone, situated about half a mile south of that of the Cloyne valley. It ranges in a dell from east to west nearly two miles, being about one eighth of a mile in thickness; and, as exposed in the principal quarries of Carrigacrump and Eallyfin, its strata appear on the northern side, dipping 70° to the south, corresponding in that respect with the adjacent clayslate on the north; but in proceeding south the limestone approaches to the vertical position.
(32.) I have yet to notice two small isolated bands of limestone in the greywacke and slate series, the one situated at Blarney, north of the river Lee, the other adjacent to that river and south of Macroom.
  At Blarney the limestone forms a ridge of slight elevation, about two miles in length, ranging east and west, in strata apparently nearly vertical. Blarney Castle is situated about midway between the two extremities of the ridge, which becomes narrow toward the east, but widens toward the west; its greatest width being nearly half a mile. The red slate and grey wacke rocks which bound this limestone on the north and south, approach the vertical position, yet with a prevailing dip toward the south, though the northerly dip also occurs. High, hilly ground, about two miles wide, intervenes between the Blarney limestone and the river Lee.
The band of limestone south of Macroom, stretches along the right bank of the river Lee to an extent of two miles, but in its progress west it crosses that river, proceeding about half a mile further. It nowhere appears to exceed half a mile in width, and its general position may be considered as vertical, the slaty and greywacke rocks by which it is bounded, being on the south either vertical, or inclined north, and on the north inclined south, yet nearly vertical; while still more north and south the dip becomes interchangeable, high angles in these cases always prevailing. In the hills flanking this limestone, and also in the defiles which lead toward the Castlemore limestone in the valley of the Bride (§. 29), may be observed many varieties of greywacke, quartz-rock, and slate, of varying shades of blue, green, brown, red, and grey.
  In the limestones mentioned in §§. 31 and 32 organic reliquite appear very sparingly.
(33.) In addition to the organic remains noticed by me in the transition limestone in the preceding §§. 21 to 32, I here subjoin a list of those observed by Mr. S. Wright in the Cork limestones, for which list and their localities I am indebted to that gentleman, almost all the species having been determined by Mr. James de Carle Sowerby. The locality given as Cork, implies that the species were derived from quarries near that city, in the direction of the village of Evergreen; while that of Ballinlough denotes a position nearly half way between the city and the extremity of the peninsula of Black Rock. To the localities of those species which have been found also in the transition tracts of Great Britain or other countries I have affixed the mark f; to those occurring also in the carboniferous limestone of Ireland, the mark; and to such as have been met with likewise in the carboniferous limestone of Great Britain or other countries, the mark j. From this list it will be obvious that many species of Productae, Spiriferae, and Terebratulae, in particular, are common to both the transition and carboniferous epochs. For many of the distinct localities of these and other organic remains specified, reference may be further had to Sowerby's Mineral Conchology; the 3rd edition of Mr. De la Beche's Geological Manual, 1833; the German modified translation of the 2nd edition of the same work by M. von Dechen, 1832, and the French translation of the 2nd edition of same work by M. Brochant de Villiers, 1833 (the latter being distinguished by very useful references to the published figures of fossils, as well as by other additional matter); also the excellent work on Geology in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana by Professor Phillips; and to other authors.
(34.) The metalliferous indications appearing on apart of the Waterford south coast, lying immediately east and west of the Bonmahon river (§. 18.) have given rise to mining operations at different periods, which seem in general to have been attended with little advantage. The greater part of the workings were shallow.
  To the westward of the river such operations were conducted upon fifteen different veins in the face of the cliffs, three being worked for lead, and the remainder for copper. Latterly, researches have been extended more inland, upon some old workings at Monachoe, to a depth exceeding fifty fathoms, but they yielded only a small quantity of copper ore, the vein not having improved in depth. On the other hand, on the east of the river, a vein of copper ore discovered more recently at Ballinasisla, yielded valuable returns to a considerable depth, but latterly it has become nearly barren. On this part of the coast the old trials were conducted on seven veins for copper, and two veins for lead.
These metalliferous veins affect, for the most part, a nearly north and south course, the dip being to the east or west, or to both in the same vein at different depths. They, however, frequently ramify both on the line of range and dip.
(35.) The metalliferous relations in the county of Cork, refer chiefly to the lead mines of Ringabella and Doneen, and to the copper mines of Audley, Ballydehob, and Allihies. 
(36.) In the small inlet of Ringabella, on the western side of the entrance to Cork harbour, the slate, which is displayed on both banks, ranges east and west, and dips 80° south, and on the south side of the inlet rises a small low hill, in which is situated the Ringabella lead mine. This undertaking is conducted on a bed in the slate, composed of quartz and sparry iron ore with interlaminated slate, which contains galena, pyrites of copper and iron, and some calcareous spar. It is irregular in form, varying from a few inches to one and a half feet in width. The two firstmentioned substances predominate, the sparry iron ore often forming a drusy assemblage of crystals. The lead ore appears in bunches, the copper ore is sparingly disseminated, while the iron pyrites is more abundant. I am informed that the trial has not been conducted to a greater depth than twenty fathoms.
(37.) In the southern cliffs of Doneen Inlet, on the western side of Clonekilty Bay, are the remains of old works, close to the sea, conducted, as reported, to the depth of thirty or forty fathoms. Judging by those remains, the object of research would appear to have been a bed in the slate, between one and two feet wide, composed of sparry iron ore and quartz, with disseminated galena, and pyrites of copper and iron, and hence, in formation, bearing considerable analogy to that noticed in the Ringabella mine.
The range of the slate on this part of the coast is generally east and west, the strata being nearly vertical, or inclined at a high angle to the south.
Upon the strand below the northern cliffs of Doneen, are displayed beds of sulphate of barytes, with intervening strata of slate, the former being mostly compact, or minutely granular-foliated, with some appearances also of the large lamellar structure. There are three of these beds, the northern being one and a half to two feet wide, the middle one about four feet, and the southern six or eight inches; the interval of slate between the first and second beds being three to five feet, and between the second and third, twenty feet. These beds contain only a few specks of pyrites of iron and copper, and some galena sparingly disseminated. In their arrangement they are nearly rectilinear; but about ten fathoms north of the northern bed of sulphate of barytes, the slate forms acute-angled inflections, which are exhibited in a horizontal section.
(38.) In the Audley mines, which are situated about ten miles south-west of Skibbereen, the metalliferous deposits are also contemporaneous with the rock, which consists of slate more or less quartzose, and passing into quartz-rock. The principal workings are on the town-land of Cappagh, conducted on a metalliferous bed, the inclination of the strata being at an angle of 80° to the south. The bed generally consists of quartz, accompanied by purple and green copper ores, but sometimes the quartz disappears, and the metalliferous deposit is confined to the slate alone, appearing in strings and Makes. The bed has varied in its course from an inch and less to two feet and a half in width, forming separate bunches connected by a leader; and it is occasionally joined and traversed by contemporaneous veins of quartz, most of which are barren, but some contain also interspersed specks of purple and green copper ores. North of this bed is a second of a similar nature, which being only at a short distance, is wrought at the same time. These workings have been extended upwards of seventy fathoms in depth.
South of Cappagh mine the slate, after having become vertical, gradually acquires the northerly dip, which prevails also throughout Horse Island, adjacent on the south, varying here from 45° to 60° above the horizon. Here also may be occasionally observed a thin layer of slate (commonly varying from a line to three or four inches in width), which is penetrated with cupreous particles, namely, slight flakes of green carbonate of copper scattered between the laminae and in the fissures of the rock, accompanied by disseminated purple copper ore; and a similar layer sometimes contains also quartz and a small portion of calcareous spar. Quartz veins likewise frequently traverse the rock, mostly ranging in the direction of the dip of the slate, and varying from a line to two, three, or four inches wide; but they often terminate at the distance of two or three feet. They are mostly barren, yet some contain slight flakes of the green carbonate, and specks of the purple sulphuret of copper; chlorite also is not uncommon. In the vicinity of these veins the slate is very quartziferous, and in some of the layers may be incidentally observed, interspersed particles of pyrites of copper and iron.
  A similar diffusion of metallic particles occurs in the slate of the townlands of Filemuck and Ballycomisk, which flank Cappagh on the north; seven discontinuous layers being disposed there, somewhat in an echelon order, and having given rise to as many different trials. The greater part of these trials extended only about ten feet, while one of them was 24 feet in depth; but the principal, called Ballycomisk mine, was carried down to the depth of 20 fathoms, yet the working in the bottom seldom exceeded six fathoms in length, being that of the main bearing of ore. This was conducted on a bed of quartz mixed with slate, about two feet wide, containing yellow copper ore, specular and micaceous iron ore, some sulphate of barytes, iron pyrites, and a little purple copper ore. The cupreous deposits in some of these trials, have extended occasionally to the width of three or four feet in the rock.
(39.) Analogous relations to those now described (§.38), occurred at the Ballydehob mine on Mr. Swanton's estate, situated about one and a half mile north of Cappagh. The works here extended about 20 fathoms in depth.
Some similar indications of ore occur on Lord Audley's property adjoining the Ballydehob mine; also on Mr. Becher's estate, lying about one mile and a half to the north-west; also, one mile and a half further in the same direction, on Mr. Teulon's land in Gurtinakilly. A similar occurrence is to be observed about two miles south of Skibbereen on the townland of Moneyvolan, Colonel Townsend's property; and again in Hare Island, south-east of Horse Island.
This diffusion of cupreous particles through a portion of the county of Cork is*remarkable; and it is to be hoped that the indications mav lead to the discovery of some valuable deposit.
(40.) Cupriferous peat-bog. In the year 1812 there existed on the eastern side of Glandore harbour, a peat-bog occupying a small dell, and extending over a very few acres, which was found charged with copper. The peat was in consequence cut out, burnt, and (he copper thus became concentrated in the ashes. Forty or fifty tons of the dry peat produced about one ton of cupriferous ashes, which were sufficiently rich to yield a remunerating price when sold. Some of the ashes are said to have contained as much as 10 or 15 percent, of copper. This discovery led to some trials in the vicinity with a view to find the source of the saline impregnation. In these researches, however, there were met with in the soil, only detached portions of iron ore and manganese, partly blended with quartz and sulphate of barytes. It seems not improbable that this deposition of copper in the bog, originated in the decomposition of some of the sulphurets of copper, contained in the vicinage, either in a metalliferous bed, or partially disseminated in the rock; both of which cases, we have shown, are not of uncommon occurrence in this part of the island.
Quarries of roofing-slate are worked near Glandore harbour, and other parts adjacent to the south coast; and of this slate considerable use is made in the country. But it cannot vie either with the Welsh or the Valentia slate.
(41.) One of the most valuable copper mines in Ireland is that of Allihies, situated in the south-western extremity of the county of Cork, facing the entrance of Kenmaie bay. It was discovered by a Wicklow miner in the year 1812, and it has been since wrought with great success, having yielded upon an average more than two thousand tons of merchantable ore per annum, which has been sold in the Swansea market, in general, at the rate of about £ 10 per ton. This body of ore has been derived from a powerful vein of quartz, which is of variable dimensions, but has in some parts been found enlarged to the breadth of thirty feet. The principal deposits of ore have occurred adjacent to the walls. The vein ranges in general in a north and south direction, intersecting the slaty rocks of the country, but in a part of its course it also runs parallel with the slate. The chief workings have been extended to a depth exceeding fifty fathoms, the prevailing ore being copper pyrites.
(6.) In the Transition Limestone. 
(42.) The transition limestone of the South of Ireland has hitherto been found productive of metal in the county of Kerry alone; viz., in the lead mines of Kenmare, and in the copper mines of Muckruss, Ross Island, and Crow Island.
(43.) The Kenmare limestone field (§ 23.) extends from west to east, through the following properties, opposite to which are placed the indications of metals observed in each respectively.
(45.) The earliest working of the Ross Island mine, is ascribed to the times of the Danish inroads; and the shallow parts above the level of the lake were evidently wrought by fire, being composed of chambers ofa rudely vaulted foim. The works have been resumed at various periods; one of the latest was in the year 1804, from which time the operations were continued until 1810. In this interval 3220 tons of ore were raised, the sale of which amounted to 69,487Z., being on an average about 21Z. per ton; and the standard price of copper during those years having averaged 135 per ton, the ores appear to have yielded 17 per cent, of copper.
  In the year 1825 my attention was drawn to this mine, then filled with water, the level of which corresponded with that of the lake. The mine had been represented by some as a metalliferous bed, dipping to the south at an angle of 16° from the horizon, yet partially connected with irregular contemporaneous veins; while by others it was considered as a rake vein. In reference to what follows, the annexed plan and section of Ross Island mine will be found serviceable. They represent the state in which the mine was left in the summer of 1829.
  To redeem this mine I devised the fallowing plan: 1. To form an efficient embankment, drawn from the west to the east through the deep water on the south, thus gaining a considerable portion of land from the lake: 2. To sink a new engine-shaft south of the old mine, intercepting in greater depth the metalliferous bearing, and forming there new workings: 3. To drain, in the mean while, the old mine by horizontal rods extending from the new engine-house to the old engine-shaft: 4 and lastly, by connecting the new with the old workings, to render the new engine-shaft the central point of drainage.
The preliminary works having been completed in sixteen months, the drainage was effected in May 1827. The succeeding operations showed that the real geological circumstances of this mine had never been clearly understood. They proved, in fact, that the mine was not wrought upon a metalliferous bed, nor upon any real rake vein or true lode; but that the metallic deposits formed a portion of, and were contemporaneous with the rock mass itself; being most unequally and irregularly distributed in the form of isolated portions, branches, strings, and particles of ore minutely disseminated, in a manner quite analogous to the strings, filaments, and other portions of calcareous spar which are also embodied in the substance of the limestone mass. Though thus irregularly incorporated with the rock, the general disposition of the metalliferous ground assumed an cast and west range with a southerly dip, but without any wall or decided line of partition, so that the form of the excavation, made in any case, depended wholly on the extent to which the ore was disseminated, laterally as well as longitudinally, and deserved extraction.
  In the plan the shaded space indicates the extent of the excavations upon ground productive of ore, its northern extremity showing the actual outcrop at the surface upon an inflected line from east to west, and its southern extremity denoting the irregular limits of the metallic deposits in their inclination to the southward. The dip of the excavations thus formed, is exhibited in the section. The northern (ore-ground) inclines in general at an angle of 16° from the horizon, and the southern (ore-ground) at an angle of 35°; but to the westward they collapse, run together, and are finally attenuated in the form of a thin wedge. On the other hand, to the eastward, the southern body of ore-ground extends only a short distance beyond the meridian of the New Engine Shaft, while the northern body becomes in the eastern direction gradually more and more contracted in its dimensions, terminating, beyond the excavation called the Blue Hole, in occasional slight filaments and particles of ore, dispersed through the rock, unworthy of pursuit. The workings in the Blue Hole itself were conducted in the northern part on discontinuous branches and strings of yellow copper ore; and in the southern part chiefly on irregular masses imbedded in the rock, which consisted of an unprofitable compound of blende, galena, and iron pyrites, with a slight intermixture of copper ore. Yet considerably to the westward, adjacent to the ClifT shaft, an isolated, profitable bearing of good yellow ore was met with, but this did not ascend to the surface.
In short, Ross Island consists for the greater part of what may briefly be called the siliceous limestone, namely, a series of thin, alternating- beds of limestone, hornstone, quartz, and lydian stone, with some few of clay-slate interposed. This series supports, at the southern angle of the isle, continuous, thick strata of blue limestone, which form a body, in its highest part, from ten to twelve fathoms in thickness, and, in its lowest part, about six fathoms. The blue limestone rests in a perfectly conformable position upon the siliceous limestone, the inflection of the two kinds of rock corresponding throughout, rising and outcropping to the north at an angle of 40° to 45°, but in descending to the south, gradually flattening to an angle of 6° or 7°, and on approaching the lake becoming absolutely horizontal. The line of division thus marked in the section, between the two descriptions of limestone, serves to indicate correctly their coinciding stratification ; and by the miner it is familiarly termed the flat bed. The juxtaposition of the two rocks is, in most cases, so close as scarcely to admit the blade of a knife; but in some places the line of separation is expanded to a few inches, and, though very rarely, even to two or three feet; the interval being occupied by clay, either wholly barren, or containing occasionally iron pyrites, or disseminated particles of copper ore, derived from the deposits above.
The metallic deposits, thus described, occur in the blue limestone mass, and terminate in their descent to the southward on reaching the flat bed, never penetrating into the subjacent, siliceous limestone. The galleries, drifts, and sinkings proved this fact. The two former (distinguished in the plan and section by narrow lines) are wholly driven in the blue limestone, the siliceous limestone forming their floor *, and in the deep level (marked by broader lines) the siliceous limestone is chiefly cut into. The new engine shaft penetrated 44 feet into the siliceous limestone, and a borehole from its bottom went 3l£ feet deeper; and a cross-cut was driven from Cock's shaft wholly in the siliceous limestone under the Blue Hole, and connected therewith by a bore-hole; yet by none of these operations was a particle of ore found in this rock.
The experience thus gained prognosticated an early termination to this mining adventure, unless further discoveries could be made either within or beyond the then existing excavations. With the former view, drifts were opened from the Cliff shaft to the north-east and east; and by eight bore-holes the ground was also searched in the south-eastern quarter; but by neither operation was any discovery effected. Galleries were likewise extended to the westward, and by one of these, productive ground was laid open, which led to the excavation of a whole mass of rock, containing disseminated ore, from the flat bed up to the very surface, as indicated by the darker-coloured, triangular space marked on the plan.
  To try the ground effectually to the north of the mine, both in the blue limestone and the subjacent siliceous limestone, the following measures were adopted: (See Section.) 1st, A crosscut was driven twenty fathoms north from No. 8 shaft in the blue limestone, and a winze or pit was then sunk in the siliceous limestone five fathoms deep, from which a bore-hole went five fathoms deeper. 2nd, Another cross-cut went north-west nineteen fathoms, being fifteen fathoms beyond the ore ground, and a bore-hole was put down beyond it. 3rd, A series of bore-holes, thirty in number, were distributed over the north ground, descending in all cases through the blue limestone into the siliceous limestone, and in a few instances perforating the latter rock to the depth of five fathoms. 4th, Trenches were cut down to the blue limestone rock, and extended to the north nearly to the siliceous limestone, which crops out there at the surface. By none of these researches was any discovery made.
  I must here observe that had any true lode or rake vein, upon whatever range, existed within the precincts of the mine, it must have been discovered in the course of working; and the same assertion holds good with respect to any vein which might have ranged north and south in the ground, north of the mine; and with regard to any vein upon an east and west range in the north ground, the trenches would have made its discovery. Again, had any irregular metallic deposit, analogous to those occurring in the existing mine, been contained in the north ground, it must have been detected either by the bore-holes distributed over that surface, or by the trenches.
The preceding details, which may perhaps more immediately interest professed miners, are yet important, since they establish the geological relations of this mine both in a positive and negative manner; and they may thus prove useful to future inquirers in researches of a similar nature.
During the course of operations between May 1827 and May 1829 inclusive, 1529 tons of ore were raised, averaging in produce 13$ per cent, of copper, the sale of which amounted to 18,090, being equal to 11 per ton; the average standard price of copper during that time having been about 108 per ton.
  In the earlier part of this undertaking the ore raised, amounted sometimes to nearly 100 tons per month; but the last month's work yielded only 29 tons, the main deposits of ore having, in tact, been worked out. These ores consisted chiefly of grey, yellow, and purple sulphurets. Green and blue carbonates and tile copper ores, with small portions of native copper and crystallized red copper ore, occurred much more rarely, having been chiefly found in the part of the blue limestone immediately over the flat bed. Intermingled particles of galena were likewise incidentally met with, as well as blende and iron pyrites more in mass.
This remarkable metallic deposit, coeval in its origin with the limestone rock itself, must have yielded, from first to last, a produce exceeding in value 100,000 sterling.
  As dependent on the structure and condition of the limestone rock, I think it necessary to add a few words on the water of this mine. When full access had been obtained to the interior, fissures were found, in general nearly vertical, some upon a north and south, and others upon an east and west range, which, in the course of their extent, varied from the tenth of an inch to four or five feet in breadth, the expansions being sudden, irregular, and of comparatively short continuance. These fissures and cavities are commonly filled with a closely compacted mass of pebbles, gravel, and sand, imbedded in clay, and, when persistent, generally impervious to water; but unoccupied intervals occurring in some places, it is easy to conceive that upon such fissures passing outwardly to the lake, those spaces would become gradually enlarged by the fretting of the lake water, and the feeders of the mine be proportionately increased. Nor was this the only source of the water flowing into the mine. From the horizontal disposition of the flat bed in its direction to the southward, ascertained by the cutting of the deep level, it became evident that the flat bed must run into the lake at the distance of about twenty fathoms from the embankment in the deep water, opposite to Dyer's shaft, the bottom of the lake deepening in that quarter rapidly to the south. And the surge of the lake, which in a storm is like a tempestuous sea, could not but press its waters with an increased impetus, fretting, by the line of the flat bed, into the mine. And such was found to be the case in the progress of the deep level to the westward.
Thus the discharge of water, from a depth of 9$ fathoms, was, from May to December 1827, 3£ to 4 tons per minute; and afterwards from a depth of 10^ fathoms, between December 1827 and April 1828, 4 to 5£ tons per minute, and in June 6^ tons per minute; but after the deep level had passed Spillane's shaft, it increased progressively to 8, 9, 10, and 11J tons per minute. This was caused by the deep level cutting a vertical fissure four inches wide, and by the opening of the flat space between the blue and siliceous limestone, to the height of nine inches. By the latter line great quantities of pebbles were washed into the mine. As a check to the influx of water, dams were fixed in the level; but from thenceforward, namely, to May 1829, the average discharge from the mine was 8 or 9 tons per minute. When required, the steam engine (of 36-inches cylinder, working single,) has been made to throw out I35 tons of water per minute, or nearly 20,000 tons in 24, hours.
(46.) In Crow Island, which is situated about half a mile to the' eastward of Ross Island, and is of small extent, being only about twenty fathoms in breadth, the mine is said to have yielded about 100 tons of copper ore of inferior quality. This was obtained from slight, contemporaneous strings, isolated portions and particles of ore, of uncertain distribution in the blue limestone rock, and blended more or less with calcareous spar, and partially contaminated by an intermixture of blende, iron pyrites, and galena; the formation being analogous to that prevailing in the vicinage of the Blue Hole at Ross Island, was poor and unpromising. The principal working was about fifteen fathoms long and six fathoms deep, the line of excavation ranging 30° west of north and east of south, with an inclination of 65° to the south of west.
II.—CARBONIFEROUS SERIES. 
  I. In South Munster, viz., in Cork, Limerick, and Kerry. 
Old Red Sandstone. 
(47.) In the eastern quarter of our field, I have first to notice the old red sandstone of Kilworth mountain and the adjacent hills, on the north of the river Blackwater. Furrowed by defiles and ravines whose course is toward the vale of the Blackwater, the subjacent clayslate is exposed to our view, in strata nearly vertical, supporting the sandstone formation in unconformed position. The formation, as here exhibited, may be taken as a good example of the old red sandstone of Ireland, and it will bear a close comparison with that of England, to which it is quite analogous, presenting the same varieties in colour and composition, and consisting of compact and slaty beds of firm sandstone, associated with others of a looser texture, with sandstone conglomerate, and with beds of indurated clay and slaty clay; the reddish brown colour predominating in the series.
(48.) Within the ranges of the Gaultees, Slievenamuck, Slieve Riagh, and Seefin mountains, clay-slate and greywacke rocks (partially traversed by small veins of calcareous spar) form their foundation, in a position nearly vertical, ranging from the glen of Aharlow to the westward, and upholding on each side unconformable, continuous mountain masses and isolated caps of the old red sandstone formation. An expansion of this sandstone spreads, on the north, into the plains of Limerick, extending westward to, and constituting the substance of, the three ranges of hills called Knockfeernagh, Kilcruaig, with Knockaderry, and Kilmeady; yet excepting the knoll of Knockfeernagh, which consists of greywacke, and greywacke slate. The sandstone of the plain is generally fine-grained, and yields good flagstones in the quarries adjacent to the road between Kilmallock and Bruff, where it is about three miles wide, nearly horizontal, or gently undulated on the large scale, supporting the carboniferous limestone in conformable position both on its northern and southern sides, and dipping in the former 10° to the north, and in the latter 20° to the south.
In the ranges of Knockfeernagh, Kilcruaig, and Kilmeady, the sandstone is generally composed of granular quartz, with interstices partly filled with white or yellowish earth (like decomposed felspar) or yellow or brown oxide of iron, scales of silvery mica being sparingly scattered through the mass. When the mica is more abundant, the rock takes a coarse slaty structure. When consisting of nearly pure grains of quartz, closely compacted, it approaches to the character of quartzrock. Though associated with beds of red, indurated clay, and slaty clay, its general colour is yellowish or greyish white; but where a greater diffusion of iron oxide takes place, it acquires a brownish or reddish tinge. Each range is formed of strata nearly horizontal on the top, but which on the sides decline toward the limestone plain, under angles varying successively in different quarters from 60° to 40°, 30°, 20°, and even as low as 15° and 10°. The superposition of the limestone to the sandstone may be traced in some places, as at the western ends of the ranges of Kilmeady and Knockaderry; and near the points of contact the limestone is sandy.
Looking to the composition and structure of Knockfeernagh, it may be presumed, that all the three ranges derive their forms from subjacent ridges of greywacke and slate, the sandstone conforming to their surface. In the protruding knoll of Knockfeernagh, the greywacke and slate range to the east and west, dipping 85° to the north; but in the defile below, which traverses the range from north to south, on the east of the knoll, there exposing those rocks, they dip 80° to 85° to the south; the opposite dips doubtless arising from a flexure of the strata in their descent. They are here surmounted by beds of sandstone and red slate-clay in nearly horizontal position. The projecting knoll above is surrounded by the sandstone on every side, and the greywacke and slate which compose it may be described as follows.
  A base of clay-slate more or less incorporated with mica, or chlorite, or quartz, and enveloping rounded or angular fragments of hornstone, quartz, and slate; usually containing also, scattered through the mass, scales of silvery mica, particles of vitreous quartz, and more rarely fragments of felspar. Calcareous spar, more or less disseminated, is also not an uncommon ingredient. When in a state of disintegration, the exhibition of yellow and brown oxides of iron becomes very abundant. The same rocks, in the defile below, partake more of the character of a compact clay-slate or novaculite, enveloping some of the other ingredients mentioned. These include a bed of stratified quartz rock, about ten fathoms thick, consisting almost wholly of simple granular quartz-rock, closely consolidated, and exhibiting a small splintery fracture.
(49.) I have already remarked (§. 10. and §. 13.) that in the western quarter of our field, the old red sandstone of Slieve Meesh overlies the transition rocks of Cahirconree in their range to the eastward; and that they reappear more east from beneath the old red sandstone, forming a low ridge of greywacke, which crosses the river Maine near its head: partly separating the vale of the latter from that of Castle Island, and supporting there, on each side, the carboniferous limestone.
The old red sandstone of Slieve Meesh may be best studied from the northern side, where it is penetrated by deep sinuous glens and ravines. The southern side of the range being little interrupted, does not present the same facilities for observation. Between three and four miles to the south-west of Tralee is the mouth of Curahene glen. At two and four miles east of this, respectively, are the two mouths of Blennerhasset's glen, the more distant being adjacent to the old road leading from Tralee across Slieve Meesh to Castlemaine. Two miles still further east, are ravines adjoining the old road from Tralee to Killarney. In the last-mentioned locality may be observed alternating beds of red sandstone, red and mottled indurated clay, and red, micaceous, slaty clay. These beds, where exposed in the higher lands, are nearly horizontal, or incline gently to the north; but in descending toward the carboniferous limestone of the vale of Tralee, they successively dip 20°, 15° and 10° north. At the eastern mouth of Blennerhasset's glen are similar beds, inclined 25° to the north. They repose on continuous strata of solid red sandstone, reaching nearly one mile up the glen; but the sandstone gradually loses the intense red colour, becoming generally of a brownish grey hue. The lowest angle observed in the dip of the beds in this glen, was 15° to the north.
The approach to Curahene glen is rendered very striking by the immense accumulation of blocks and boulders of red sandstone and sandstone conglomerate, which form a kind of promontory, proceeding from the mouth of the glen to the plain below, and expanding there to the east and west. Through this accumulation, the stream which issues from the glen, winds its way, having high banks on both sides. In the glen upward, the banks also are composed of similar debris, and the firm rock is first displayed, in any continuity, in the brows overhanging the northern entrance of the glen, where sandstone and sandstone conglomerate dip 30° to the north. Further up the glen these rocks approach nearer to the horizontal position ; and still more south, a reversed inclination toward the south becomes perceptible. The sandstone of this glen, whether in situ or detached, is remarkable for its uniform red or purplish colour, with little difference in the shade. It is commonly of a rather coarse structure, and some varieties of the conglomerate contain rounded and angular fragments, chiefly composed of quartz, as large as turkey's eggs.
The beds of red clay and slaty clay, associated with the red sandstone in the northern confines of the formation, appear to decline in their progress westward into the vale, and they probably pass into the sea to the south of Blennerville.
(50.) To the north of Tralee bay, the old red sandstone reappears, forming Kerry Head, and arranged in strata nearly horizontal on the higher lands, but declining thence, on every side, at angles as low as 15°tol0°. In the cliffs along the shore, extending from Ballyheige castle to the westward, and round the Head to the north side, the rocks are well exposed, showing beds of firm sandstone of brown, red, grey, bluish and greenish colours, associated occasionally with beds of red, indurated clay and slaty clay, both simple and micaceous; sandstone conglomerate also occurring in the series.
Carboniferous Limestone. 
(51.) This formation is found both in the western and eastern portions of our field, reposing either directly and unconformably on the transition series, or conformably on the old red sandstone, when the latter intervenes.
Thus in the west, at the junction of the valleys of the Laune and the Maine, the limestone rests on the transition rocks; but in its circuitous course eastward up the latter valley, across that of the Brown Flesk, and around, past Castle Island, westward to Tralee bay, it reposes chiefly on the old red sandstone of Slieve Meesh, while to the east it appears resting on the greywacke projection which forms the eastern foot of that range, already noticed in §. 49. North of Slieve Meesh, and south of Tralee, the limestone is slightly inclined to the north, yet gently undulated. North of that town, the strata are more nearly horizontal; but about midway between it and Castle Island, they dip 60° to 65° to the north, forming protruding knolls on a line three miles in extent. Further east, and to the south of Castle Island, and around the greywacke which projects into the vales of the Brown Flesk and the Maine, the limestone is nearly horizontal, yet subject to undulations, as it also is in its further progress down the valley of the Maine, the latter variations in the dip being from north to south; while in the line of contact with the old red sandstone on the south side of Slieve Meesh, the general dip, as exhibited in the quarries, is 20° to 25° to the south. Again, to the north of Ardfert the limestone reposes on the old red sandstone of Kerry Head, while both are overlaid in that quarter by an outlying portion of the coal measures.
  It will be hereafter seen, that the limestone of this district, which in its devious course is continued from Tralee bay to Listowel on the north-east, and thence to the mouth of the river Shannon on the north-west, is in conformable position with the superincumbent coal measures, wherever denudation affords an opportunity of observation.
(52.) In the eastern quarter, the carboniferous limestone first appears on the south of the Blackwater in Dromaneen townland, about four miles west from Mallow; and in the Marble-hill quarry the stratification is well displayed, thin beds of black limestone and grey and black slate-clay alternating with each other, the whole dipping 10° to the north; while the greywacke, sandstone, and slate series, which form its southern and western boundary, dip to the south. West of Dromaneen, the greywacke country extends about six miles, before we reach the transition limestone near Roskeen Bridge.
Following the line of the Blackwater to the east, the limestone is found in some parts occupying both banks, and in others confined to one bank of the river, as may be seen in the map; but the stratification is often ill developed. On the east of Mallow there appears a disposition to the northerly dip. Approaching Fermoy the strata incline toward the south, conformably with the old red sandstone in Kilworth mountain, in which quarter, viz. in the defile called Araglen, may be remarked an outlying portion of the carboniferous limestone, about two miles in extent, the connexion of which with the same formation in the vale of the Blackwater, appears to have been interrupted by denuding causes. Near Lismore the dip is also to the south; but between Cappoquin and Oungarvan bay the strata appear to form an arched inflection from north to south, abrupted at the surface, and hence showing a northern and southern dip on the sides, with nearly vertical strata intervening. In Ballynacourty Point, which forms the northern side of Dungarvan bay, and in the ledge of rocks stretching out eastward into the sea, the limestone strata are arranged according to a semicircular flexure, the dip being successively to the north, the east, and the south. The limestone alternates in some parts with slate clay.
  On the other hand, the greywacke and slate ranges, which immediately flank on the north and the south, the vale of Dungarvan, and the line of the Blackwater higher up to the west, generally dip 70° to 75° toward the south.
(53.) In the northern and more central portion of our field, the limestone is supported by the old red sandstone, being inclined, where contiguous to that formation; but in the plains it more nearly approaches to the horizontal position, as at Ballydaniel, two miles north of Broadford, and at Newcastle, in the line of the river Arrow, yet it is subject to local inflections at higher angles, arising from undulations in the strata. The same appearances are observable in proceeding further north toward the Shannon, and north-east toward Limerick.
(54.) The limestone of our tract is frequently continuous over a large area; but, as already shown, it occasionally alternates with slate-clay or shale, as in the central part of the district, at the Broadford quarries, two miles west from Drumcullaghar. It is also associated with lydian stone, hornstone, black carbonaceous shale, trap, and porphyry. , .
  Its association with lydian stone is well developed in the hilly ground adjacent to the south side of the Guestin river, above its confluence with the Laune, containing, as in the Listry quarry, beds of that substance, from a few inches to three and four feet thick. The dip is to the north, while on the opposite side or right bank of the stream, as at Lisinvane, the dip is to the south, the beds consisting chiefly of brown shale, lydian stone, and hornstone, with others of black limestone. This part of the stream appears to run in a concavity formed by an undulation of the strata.
(55.) The association of the limestone with black carbonaceous shale, may be observed to advantage both in the west and east of the field.
  In the west, these rocks appear on the coast to the north of the Cashen or Feale river, extending nearly two miles between Ballybunnian and Lick Castle, alternating both in thin and very thick beds, whose general inclination is toward the north-east, yet undulated on the large scale, commonly under an angle of 25° to 30°, but in some places they are at high angles, and even vertical. These great undulations have been broken in upon, by inroads of the sea in a direction from west to east, forming six or seven inlets or coves, in which, by abruption and perforation, the rocks have been wrought into a variety of fantastic forms, with archways and caverns winding into the interior. In the black shale, iron pyrites being incidentally disseminated, and mutual decomposition taking place, alum, hydrate of iron, &c. are produced, and the face of the rock becomes stained with white, yellow, brown, and reddish depositions. These substances penetrate also into the fissures of the rock, in which wavellite likewise is found.
  In the east we may notice that portion of the carboniferous limestone which is adjacent to the angular boundary, formed by the conjunction of the counties of Cork, Limerick, and Tipperary. It there contains massy beds, both of grey slate-clay and black carbonaceous shale, in the latter of which iron pyrites is not unfrequently distributed. The appearance of this black shale gave rise to trials for coal about forty years since, several pits having been sunk for that purpose, but without any success.
(56.) The association of the carboniferous limestone with trap and porphyry, has been treated by me, at some length, in my Memoir on the East of Ireland, and I therein indicated (§. 178.) that the distribution of those rocks in the limestone, was probably more extensive than I had then an opportunity of ascertaining. The subject has since been resumed, both by Dr. Apjohnf and Mr. Ainsworth J, and to the respective memoirs of those gentlemen 1 beg to refer for the details of their extended researches. With Captain Sabine, R.A., and Mr. Ainsworth, I have since had the satisfaction of visiting part of the ground formerly left by me unexplored; and in the map I have introduced the range of the trappean and porphyritic series determined by the latter. Of that portion of the district which lies to the west and north-west of the field formerly examined by me, a general view may be obtained from the hill of Carrig Parsons, situated about midway between Limerick and Pallis Hill, overlooking the vale which extends to the foot of the Bilboa mountains on the north. The hill is composed of limestone, and the strata are curved from south to north, but the crown of the arch is ruptured, the line of fracture being from south-west to north-east, and the beds basset out on the opposite sides of the rupture under an angle of 30°, in the western part of the hill dipping toward the vale, and in the eastern from the vale. The strata in the eastern part of the rupture present a bluff toward the valley, which is on a line with the bluff of Knockeen limestone hill, distant a few miles on the east, while still further east, on the same line, appears the trap bluff or precipice of Pallis Hill, impending over Linfield. As viewed from the summit of Carrig Parsons, the trap ranges are most prominent on the south-east near Pallis Hill; thence receding toward the south and west, through the Cahirconlish, Carrigfeoch, Ballochbega, Rallinaguard, Knocknea, and Cahirnarry ranges; while to the northwest, and more insulated, rise the trap hills of Carrig O'Gunnel, adjacent to the Shannon; and to the west of north appears the insulated trap range of Newcastle, which, in its extension west, approaches wi' MI a short distance of the artillery barracks at Limerick. In the series of such of these trap and porphyry rocks as have come under my view, I have not succeeded in finding the stilbite, mesotype, and olivine, which Mr. Ainsworth states he had noticed.
  I shall here merely add a few remarks on the trap formation at Carrig O'Gunnel, Knocknea, Cahirnarry, and the porphyry south of Lough Gur.
The castle of Carrig O'Gunnel is built on a- protruding mass of trap conglomerate, amorphous, and irregularly traversed by fissures.
The paste of the conglomerate is chiefly compact felspar, variously coloured, and sometimes mottled, but most commonly of a reddish hue, apparently much charged with iron ; but in some places it consists of very fine-grained, compact greenstone. The base envelopes fragments of limestone, mostly angular, sometimes as large as the head, and even larger, also fragments of trap corresponding more or less in composition witb the paste. Among these may be noticed also basalt with shining facets of small and minute grain. In the trap, calcareous spar appears as the most common ingredient, and portions of green earth are also incidentally diffused. Where the calcareous spar has decayed, the rock is porous and vesicular. To the north of Castle Carrig O'Gunnel hill, is a lower hill, which consists of calcareous conglomerate, a base of limestone with some green earth diffused, inclosing numerous fragments nf trap. In these conglomerates occur numerous crinoidal remains; also broken bivalves; and I noticed one specimen of Cyathophyllum.
The trap conglomerate of Knocknea resembles in many respects that of Carrig O'Gunnel, but it is disposed in tabular masses, nearly horizontal, dipping only a few degrees to the north-east. A defile separates this hill from that of Cahirnarry, on the north. The latter consists of compact basaltic greenstone, containing acicular crystals of glassy felspar, and grains of hornblende or augite, and it is disposed in a rudely thick, columnar form, without distinct sides. To the north-east of Cahirnarry is a lower hill, which appears chiefly composed of flat tabular masses of trap conglomerate (enveloping, as usual, fragments of limestone), and generally of a greenish colour, from the intimate diffusion of green earth in its composition. To the east of this, and about one mile from Cahirnarry trap hill, is the limestone hill of Carrig Parsons, which I have already mentioned.
There are few parts of the trap district in which the red felspar porphyry, is better developed than in a hill called Knock Derg, situated to the south of Lough Gur.
The basis is chiefly a finely granular or compact felspar, containing crystals of glassy felspar; the whole being, where the rock is fresh or not weathered, of a deep flesh colour or reddish brown, or of a brownish red cast. When much disintegrated, the stone, at the first glance, looks like a dirty or brick-red sandstone. The porphyry, however, is not uniformly red or brown, being in some places striped or mottled with disseminated portions of green earth. The mass of the rock is formed occasionally of spheroidal or ovoidal concretions, which separate by atmospheric influences into concentric layers. Toward the northern foot of the hill green-coloured trap conglomerate also occurs.
  It is much to be wished that some one, possessed of the necessary leisure and gifted with sufficient devotion, would construct an exact topographical map of the Limerick district occupied by trap and porphyry, showing in all cases, by the aid of sections, the precise relations of these rocks to the limestone with which they are there associated.
(57.) Large tracts of the limestone field may be traversed without encountering more than a few, thinly scattered, organic remains. It is from local deposits met with incidentally, that they are chiefly to be procured. One of the most productive is in the valley of the Maine, in the Ardconnaught quarries, and adjacent to Castlemaine mine. The following is a list of those I procured in that quarter; and the fossilist will readily notice that while mosl of the organic remains enumerated, are of common occurrence in the carboniferous limestone of other countries, several are also found in transition tracts, some of which have hitherto been considered as distinctive of the transition period: to these I have prefixed the mark, 
But to such as have hitherto been noticed only in the Cork transition limestone, and not in other transition tracts, I have affixed the mark (c.) The signs have the same import as was explained in §§. 13 and 33. Crustacea: 
(59.) In making the circuit of the South Munster coal tract, the carboniferous limestone, wherever apparent, is almost invariably found following the foot of the hills, seldom rising up a small portion of the escarpment; and when it does, the position appears to proceed from an undulation in the beds.
The following observations show the corresponding dips of the limestone and the superjacent coal measures, on the western and eastern sides of this coal-field.
  In the West, on the Ballybunian coast (§. 55.), the ascending order of succession is from limestone to shale, and from shale to sandstone. The shale first intercepts, at intervals, a solitary bed of sandstone; but in proceeding north-east sandstone gradually becomes predominant, as in the headland at Lick Castle, where these beds, with slight interposed layers of shale, dip 30 to the north-east; and this arrangement is traceable in ravines to the hilly range of Knockanore, on the east1. In proceeding, however, further east toward Listowel, the beds, both of the limestone and the coal rocks, approach the horizontal position, e. g. in the banks of the river Peale to the east of that town, dipping there only 5° to the south-east.
  At Maaling, situated near the left bank of one of the tributaries of the river Allow, and north-east from Newmarket, the limestone rises to the surface in two places on the higher grounds, disposed in strata flatly undulated from north to south, and supporting the coal rocks in corresponding position. It is traceable to the left bank of the river, and again in the more elevated lands about two miles to the westward. At Maaling the limestone, where quarried, is continuous, and of a black colour, containing courses of nodules of lydian stone which extend about twenty feet in depth, but from which the subjacent strata are free. In the latter is a bed one foot thick, almost composed of lithodendra.
Tour Hill lies about six mile9 west'from Maaling, and to the north-west of Newmarket, forming high ground, 1329 feet above the sea. The limestone here rises in dome-shaped strata, supporting the coal rocks,«which latter constitute the summit of the hill in the form of a cap, as well as the external border of the limestone, all being in conformable position. The limestone strata are continuous, 2 to 3^ feet thick, bluish or blackish grey, dipping to all points of the compass 25° to 30°, and containing lydian stone in beds,-veins, and intermingled portions. The limestone reappears in the vale at the eastern foot of Tour Hill, and again at Skull, beyond the vale, about one mile distant, in a direction to the north of east, and in strata nearly horizontal. In these lower positions the limestone is purer, being less contaminated with siliceous matter. In the Tour limestone organic remains are sparingly found, being chiefly fragments of Crinoidea and Producta Martini, but the Sanguinolaria concentrica (Phillips) also occurs.
Another outbreak of the limestone occurs at Carrigdulkeen, about ten miles to the south-east of Castle Island, and within two miles of the right bank of the river Blackwater. The deeper strata appear to be nearly horizontal, but in the higher grounds the dip is 20° to 30° to the south, and the nearest superjacent coal rocks dip in the same manner. This limestone is nearly in an alignment with that of the Guestin stream situated to the west.
(61.) The coal rocks vary in position in different portions of the tract. On the north coast, extending toward Shanagolden and Fynes Island, they may be considered as mainly undulated from the north-east or easterly inclination to the south-west or westerly, both the convex and concave portions being nearly horizontal where perfect, while the ascending or descending beds rarely attain an elevation exceeding 40° or 50°. But all these beds are commonly more or less abrupted at the surface, as well as in other portions of the tract.
The undulated structure is also apparent on the line between Newcastle and Castle Island, passing through Abbeyfeale; the coal rocks dipping in the northern escarpment 40°to 20° to the south-west, and in the southern 30° to 10° to the north-east.
The arrangement between Broadford and Kanturk, passing through Freemount and Newmarket, is analogous, the prevailing undulations being from north to south, yet in some cases attaining as high an angle as 80°.
  In penetrating from the westward, from Castle Island to Carrigdulkeen, we find the coal measures, where in contact with the limestone at the foot of the escarpment, slightly inclining to the south-east, but in the interior becoming gradually elevated to an angle of 45°, dipping south-east, as at Scartaglen, adjoining the Brown Flesk. Beyond that river they become nearly horizontal, then gently undulated, and at Carrigdulkeen they correspond in position with the subjacent limestone.
In crossing from the valley of the Maine to the river Guestin in Barry's glen, the dip is first successively 40° and 60° south; it then gradually declines to the horizontal, and is afterwards 8° or 10° to the north; while further on in Barry's glen, the southerly dip is resumed at angles between 40° and 20°. But in the range of hills lying between that glen and Killarney the interchangeable dip is repeated, at high angles, vertical beds intervening.
  A similar structure is'observable, in the same parallel, in the eastern portion of the tract. Thus, immediately north and west of Kanturk, the beds undulate from north to south, their curvature seldom reaching to a high angle; but between the Brogeen stream (which joins the Allow river from the west, near to Kanturk) and the Blackwater on the south, the coal rocks are generally in a position approaching to the vertical, with dips interchangeable north and south.
The southern portion of our coal-field, is thus marked by a range of nearly vertical beds, extending from the northern side of the Laune and Killarney on the west, to the banks of the river Allow on the east. On the south, this range immediately conjoins with the transition rocks, and it is remarkable that on the greater part of this line, namely, by the course of the Blackwater, the two series are found, the former on the left and the latter on the right bank of that river, both dipping to. the southward, and at angles nearly corresponding, viz. between 75° and 45° south, which led me in the first instance, combined with other considerations, to conceive the formations contemporaneous; but this idea was dispelled on finding the coal measures in the western and eastern portions of the tract directly incumbent on the carboniferous limestone, and the latter in the west reposing, in part, on the old red sandstone.
(62.) The rocks of the South Munster coal-field consist chiefly of varieties of sandstone or gritstone, and slate or shale, alternating with each other. In this series, I have not met with coarse conglomerates; and the slaty micaceous sandstone or flagstone, which is extensively developed in the coal formation of the county of Clare (as well as in parts of that of beinster), appears generally deficient in the tract, south of the Shannon.
  In the line of contact with the subjacent limestone, brown, yellow, grey, and black shales are the more common rocks. When firm and intermingled with quartzose and micaceous matter, they partly resemble some kinds of greywacke slate. The line of cleavage in the shales commonly forms a highly oblique angle with the plane of stratification; and on exposure to meteoric influences, the stone generally shivers into long splinters or spicular fragments. In some of the beds may also be observed a tendency to spheroidal concretions, composed of concentric lamella, formed of very fine-grained, micaceous gritstone cemented by ferruginous shale. Portions of the black shales are in some places employed as black chalk.
The gritstones are most commonly of brownish or greyish hues, seldomer greenish, and are more or less argillaceous or siliceous, as slaty or quartzose matter prevails in the composition, being also more or less micaceous. Some of the argillaceous gritstones, when containing small scaly fragments of slate interspersed, resemble some kinds of greywacke; and the purer quartzose varieties approach, in places, to the character of granular and splintery quartz rock. The gritstones generally form hard compact rocks of fine grain, quartz with more or less mica being the principal constituents, and the eementing matter forming the least proportion.
(63.) The coal of Munster, as of Leinster, is wholly anthracitous. In the field under consideration, it is found in beds either of pure anthracite, possessing a strong lustre and a conchoidal fracture, and is easily frangible; or in thin slaty, tender, and flaky layers, generally associated with black carbonaceous shale. A portion of a bed of the latter, is sometimes so strongly charged with carbon, as to burn limestone very well; though in the fracture, the grain of the shale appears wholly dull and earthy; e. g. at Tullig culm pits, situated to the north of Abbey-feale. But in no part of the tract, have I seen coal so firm and solid, as that which occurs in the Leinster districts, where it is raised in blocks, hard and tenacious. In South Munster it is generally fragile, and hence brought to the surface in the form of small coal, bearing the common name of culm. The coal is also usually much contaminated with iron pyrites, though beds do occur, comparatively free from that substance, being then denominated sweet coal.
(64.) With the exception of the small district on the south-west of Kanturk, the beds of coal met with throughout the tract are unimportant, their average thickness .varying from less than one foot to between one and two feet, including the black shale with which the coal is partially interlaminated, and which in some places constitutes the greater portion. Coal thus interlaminated with shale, has been met with in the hills north of Killarney and Tralee, but in no case was it found worthy of pursuit. The grey shale which there accompanies the coal, contains in some places small, isolated, elliptical nodules of clay ironstone.
Culm is raised from analogous beds at Loughill, nine miles north-east of Tarbert, on the left bank of the Shannon, and also three or four miles to the north of Abbeyfeale. At Tullig the slaty culm seam, is fifteen to twenty-four inches thick, the floor being black shale, and the roof gritstone, all dipping about 30° to the south-west. In Barna or Sugar Hill, which is situated nearer to the north-eastern escarpment of the coal country, is a bed of good flaky anthracite, from nine to twelve inches thick. In a more central portion of the tract, Mr. Griffith, in the year 1833 or 1834, discovered a bed of culm, in forming the new line of road from Newmarket to Castle Island, through the Crown lands of Pobble O'Keefe. A culm bed is said to have been found likewise toward the south-western escarpment, about three miles to the north of Castle Island. Slight indications of culm have been noticed also in other portions of the tract; as in the tongue of coal rocks which extend from the west and north of Mallow toward Doneraile; but the trials were not productive.
(65.) The district which claims our chief attention, extends between seven and eight miles in an eastern and western direction, with an extreme breadth of four to five miles, and is situated south-west of Kanturk and north of the Blackwater, its eastern extremity being about one mile west of the river Allow. The northern boundary may be considered as ranging from the townland of Garrevasogue, on the east, to that of Cullen, on the west, while the southern boundary passes through the townland of Drumshecan. The annexed diagram will convey a general idea of the relative position of the properties through which this coal deposit is distributed. The general range of the beds is east and west.
  On the west the townlands of Cullen, Duargan, and Kil belong to Counsellor N. P. Leader, as also on the east those of Cooleen, Dromagh, Dysart, Coolbeg, Gortine, and Garrevasogue. To Major Freeman belong Clonbannin and Island of Doghill; to Mr. John Leader, Keale ; to Mr. Broderick, Drumshecan ; to Mr. Wallis, Gurrane; to Mr. Dennis O'Callaghan, Drumskeha; to Mr. Morrison, Dromenagh; and to Mr. Walcot, Coolclough.
The more valuable portion of the district appears to be that which ranges from Gortine on the east, through Dromagh, into Drumskeha on the west, being that in which the main, or bulk beds, as they are termed, are particularly found. In the other collieries the culm seams are, with few exceptions from twelve to eighteen inches only in thickness, and I have been informed most of the parties engaged in working these small seams, have derived little advantage, while others have lost by the enterprise.
The field has been chiefly opened, in the eastern quarter, by three levels, one of which is conducted into Coolclough, from the south to the north, about eight hundred yards in length, cutting the coal at the depth of forty yards, which there consists of three seams, all dipping south, the two northern at a high angle, the southern at one rather lower. The distance between the northern and middle seam, is twenty-seven yards, and between the latter and the southern, sixty yards. In all three the floor or seat is gritstone, and the roof shale, and the coal is commonly two to three feet thick, but in some places compressed to eighteen inches, and in others enlarged to fifteen feat.
Another level was brought up from south to north, namely, from the vicinity of the Blackwater into the western part of Dromagh, being about one mile in length.
The beds thus cut through, show repeated interchanges of dip from south to north, with vertical strata intervening between each change of dip, the coal seams conforming to this arrangement, as illustrated in Section No. 6. Piate I. This section was constructed for the service of Mr. Leader by Mr. Griffith, and for a copy of it, I am indebted to the former gentleman. On the south, the beds dip about 45° to the southward, but in proceeding northward, they gradually become vertical, then incline northward, are again vertical, and afterwards the southerly dip is resumed. This succession is repeated in the more northern part of the section. It will be seen, that in the line of this level, eighteen small seams of culm were intersected before the four main or bulk beds, and the four other seams north of them, were met with. It will also be observed, that in the northern part of the section, the flexure of one coal bed is perfect in its changeable dip from south to north; from which consideration, and the general structure of the country, it might be inferred, that many of the coal beds may converge in depth, thus reducing considerably the actual number of the seams. It must be left to future experience, however, to determine, whether these beds are generally continuous in depth. I observed in one part of the field a thin bed of black shale dipping 80° north, which in its ascent thinned out, and did not reach the surface ; and a similar discontinuance might occur to a bed in its descent.
The bulk beds of culm extend in width from two or three feet, to ten, fifteen, and twenty feet, according as the walls are expanded or contracted; but the bulks occur only at intervals, there being intervening distances void of culm, in which the walls of the bed are drawn nearly close together. These bulks, therefore, are arranged somewhat in the form of parallel pipes, descending into the earth ; and yet in this descent, they are subject to contractions also.
This level has been extended to the eastward on the main beds, namely, those called the bulk the rock, and the coal veins, about two miles in length, obtaining at the eastern extremity a depth of forty yards below the surface. The workings on coal are conducted above that level, and it is only in a few places, that trials on the coal have been made forty yards deeper, Mr. Leader leaving all below that level, as a reserve for a future period, when, with the aid of deeper shafts and of steam engines, his collieries may be wrought on a more extended scale.
Faults occasionally traverse the coal-field, ranging north and south, shifting the beds to the north three or four yards, and in some places as much as fourteen or fifteen yards. Of the greater dislocations, three or four parallel ones occur in Dromagh and Gortine.
IntheDromagh section, it may be seen, that in the great majority of instances, the floor of the coal is black shale, and the roof slate-clay or sandy slate; but there are a few cases in which the floor is slate-clay or sandy slate, and the roof is either black shale or gritstone.
  A third level was brought up, also from the south, into Dromenagh, about seven hundred yards in length, cutting the coal at the depth of thirty yards from the surface.
Here are four coal seams, each about one foot thick, composed of conchoidal anthracite, the intervening coal measures being respectively sixty to seventy yards thick, and all dipping about 60° to the south. The floor of all these seams is black shale, and the roof gritstone. The beds of coal wrought in Clonbannin and Kil, are said to be the western extension of those of Dromenagh. To the north of Dromenagh, approaching the Brogeen river, the gritstone dips 80° to the south.
  In the Island of Doghill the floor of the coal also is black shale, and the roof gritstone, and the dip south.
  In Gurrane the coal seam is one to two feet thick, the floor being gritstone, and the roof black shale two feet thick, over which lie grey sandy slate three feet, gritstone two feet; then slate again, &c, all dipping 70° to the south.
  In the shale of this district may occasionally be observed small nodules, and even thin discontinuous layers of clay ironstone; but the ore does not appear to be at all abundantly distributed, either in this or any other portion of the South Munster coal tract.
The preceding notices may suffice to convey an idea of the general structure of this field', in which no excavations have hitherto been made to a greater depth than eighty yards from the surface.
(66.) The considerable quantities of iron pyrites which sometimes accompany the coal, are in places impressed with plants, and the coal itself seems, in a great measure, composed of a congeries of vegetables. The impressions occur also both in the dark and light-coloured shales, and in the clay-ironstone. The vegetable remains to be obtained from the refuse of the coal-pits, appear chiefly assignable to Equiseta, Catamites, Filices, Lepidodendra, Stigmariae, and Sigillaris, besides numerous impressions of indistinct reed-like plants and grasses. Compressed stems of Stigmariae ten or twelve yards in length sometimes occur in the black shale, also partially flattened trunks of Calamites. Of the latter, I have a fragment, measuring in the transverse section, eleven inches by eight inches; but the colliers assured me, they were sometimes found as large as eighteen inches by twelve inches. In the Stigmariae, Sigillarias, and Calamites, the external coating consists of coaly matter, while the interior is finegrained gritstone.
(69.) This formation, in the district under consideration, is quite analogous in composition, structure, and position, to that observed by me in other quarters of Ireland. This chief mass extends from Derrybryan mountain, on the north, to Lough Derg on the south-east; but from near Lake Youlky on the west, it is continued to the south and east in a narrow belt, encircling the clayslate mountains, and reposing, wherever the contact is observable, in unconformable position; in the higher grounds, in nearly horizontal strata, but on the flanks declining according to the declivity. This may be conveniently observed in the hills lying north of Limerick; and at six miles from the city on the road leading both to Broadford and Killaloe, where the sandstone rests in horizontal strata on the vertical edges of clayslate (the latter ranging east and west), but nearer the vale, the former rock dips toward the south, under angles of 25° and 20°, and the succeeding limestone is in corresponding position, yet in receding, approaches to an horizontal arrangement. These relations are also observable in the strata extending to the west past Croghanambrydy mountain. To the north, Derrybryan mountain, consisting wholly of this formation, exhibits horizontal beds in the higher lands, but inclined on the flanks. Thus, in proceeding west toward Gort. the sandstone strata are inclined 30° and 25° westward, and the succeeding limestone, where first apparent, is in conformable position, but more west it gradually becomes horizontal. In Derrybryan mountain may be found all the common varieties incident to the old red sundstone, including beds of red, indurated clay, and sandstone conglomerate. The latter rock appears occasionally in considerable force, containing, in places, rounded and angular ingredients as large as turkey's eggs; and from its mottled aspect, resembles strongly the sandstone conglomerate north of Waterford bridge, and of the Drumdowney quarries adjoining the Barrow and the Suire.
Carboniferous Limestone. (70.) The general tendency of this formation to a nearly perfect, horizontal arrangement, as extending from the county of Galway into and through that of Clare, is remarkable, the deflections from that position being only incidental and seldom important. Undulations on a very large scale occur, yet rarely varying more than a few degrees from the horizon. The chief lines of elevation are adjacent to the old red sandstone. This disposition is well developed, in passing from the western declivity of Derrybryan mountain through Gort (§. 69), across the plains to the limestone hills on the west, which there form the bounding line between Galway and Clare. Near Kilmacduagh Abbey and Rockfield, a few miles west of Gort, are broad sheets of bare limestone rock, extending repeatedly over many acres, and separated from each other, only by small green patches of herbage or pools of water. The eye thus ranges over large fields of naked rock in nearly horizontal strata, but fissured at the surface into quadrangular masses. This desolate scene is continued to the limestone hills on the west, where the same horizontal arrangement prevails, as may be noticed in their escarpments, which being in many places divested of all vegetation, the eye traces with facility the corresponding strata from hill to hill. In the projecting and partially isolated hills, this disposition is very striking, as in those adjacent to Glancolmkill, where terraces of horizontal strata, receding one above another, present the stair-like form, so characteristic of many trap districts. 
The Clare limestone is distinguished by the general continuity of its strata. The organic remains which have incidentally appeared to me, correspond generally with those derived from other portions of our field. I have already adverted (§. 57.) to the fossils noticed adjacent to the Shannon by Messrs. Weller, Sheppard, and Wright; and I shall merely add, that in the limestone of the peninsula of Renville, on the south side of the bay of Galway, I met with two species of Pentremites, which appear to be undescribed.
Coal Formation. 
(71.) This formation in Clare, as in other parts of Ireland, forms hills of greater or less magnitude, planted upon the carboniferous limestone in conformable position; the latter being at the foot of, or rising only a certain distance up, the escarpment on its northern and eastern sides.
Viewed on the large scale, the entire coal-field may be described as a nearly uniform plane, corresponding to that of the subjacent limestone, the angle of inclination seldom deviating more than a few degrees from the horizon, and the prevailing dip being from the east of north to the west of south. The highest portion of this area is the district of Mount Callan, which rising some hundred feet above the general level of that part of the coal country which is situated further north, is still more elevated above the southern portion of the tract; the surface of the latter gradually declining in that direction nearly to the level of the sea. In the higher grounds, however, as well as in the southern, or lower parts of the field, the coal measures may be occasionally observed, disposed in a gently undulated form.
The general arrangement thus described, may be traced along the eastern and northern flanks of the coal-field, as well as in the interior; but still more clearly in the mural precipices of the western coast, the natural sections of which, gradually decline in elevation in proceeding from north to south.
(72.) At the northern extremity, at Doolan and the village of Iloadford, the limestone is at the foot of the escarpment, and the calcareous base with the superimposed coal measures, may be seen in juxtaposition. The limestone appears also on the beach, and forms the low point of liallylaline. To the south of the place, where the two formations are seen in conjunction, we look along a range of cliffs facing the Atlantic as far as Luagh Point; and if we afterwards proceed to Ballyelaw Point, still more south, we obtain, in reverse position, a view to the north, extending also to Luagh Point; thus comprising in these two views, the whole of that part of the coast, a range of seven or eight miles in extent. The clifls are nearly mural throughout, varying generally in elevation perhaps from 200 to 300 feet. In the first and lowest part of the coal measures, displayed in these cliffs, the shales predominate, in which clay ironstone occasionally appears, and also gritstone in thin, subordinate beds; but higher up in the series the gritstones acquire greater magnitude and strength. In no part of this portion of the coast, has any coal been discovered ; but excellent flagstones might be raised from the slaty, micaceous gritstone, to any extent and of the largest dimensions.
(73.) On the other hand, if from Ballyelaw Point, or from Liscanon asylum harbour, situated on the east, we cross Malbay to the opposite coast, on the south-east, we find coal in the cliff" at Raneen, about five miles from Ennistymond. This is the lowest coal hitherto met with in the whole tract. It is a seam of flaky, tender anthracite, much contaminated with iron pyrites, and averaging about eighteen inches in thickness, the roof being shale, and the floor gritstone flag. It has been wrought to a very trifling extent only, for the purpose of burning limestone, brought from the south islands of Arran ; and the furthest drift inland, does not exceed fifty yards in length. The mine is situated about twenty feet above high water-mark, but the seam may be traced on its line of dip along the foot of the cliff to the south, until it sinks below the level of the sea. Above this seam is a second, perhaps 80 or 100 yards higher in the series; it does not, however, appear in the face of the cliffs, which, upon this part of the coast, scarcely attain 200 feet in height. The second seam, which does not exceed eight or nine inches in thickness, consists of solid anthracite, good "sweet" coal, the roof being shale, and the floor fire-clay, having beneath it gritstone flag. This coal was discovered about forty years ago by some Kilkenny colliers; it has been worked to a small extent only.
(74.) Hence along the coast to the southward, no coal has been found, until we reach the vicinity of Seafield, situated about fourteen miles from Ennistymond, and nine miles from Raneen. Culm has been met with on the townland of Cahirush, about one mile north of Seafield, and it is said to be twelve inches thick, but it has not been worked: and culm was formerly raised on the townland of Clahaininch, distant two miles south-west from Seafield. Pits were there sunk through the sand hillocks of the coast to the culm, which however was only six or seven inches thick, and of bad quality. No coal has been discovered further south than this spot. My own observations have not extended along this coast beyond the parallel of Kilrush, but I am assured by different authorities, that the coal measures occupy the whole interval to Loop Head, though coal itself be wanting in that part of the series.
  On the south coast of this tract, viz. at Labasheda on the right bank of the Shannon, culm has been also worked on a small scale and only to a slight depth, the pits being soon troubled with water.
(75.) The general view which I have given of the North Munster coal-field, would appear to exhibit no very favourable prospect of its productive power. To the instances of coal having been met with, I have, however, to add the fact that in times of heavy rains, coal has been washed down the ravines on the northern Bide of Mount Callan (in which direction the coal measures crop out), and in particular on the townland of Sileshawn, part of that of Ballylea, and at a place known by the name of Morrison's Mill.
From the paucity of coal appearing on this line of coast, in which the general flatness of the coal measures is so well displayed, it would seem that the lower part of the series contains very little coal. Hence, the best chance of discovery appears to lie in the more elevated region of the Mount Callan district, in which the coal measures are accumulated in greater mass; and as they there apparently retain their small deviatidh from the horizontal position, an opportunity might perhaps be afforded, should valuable seams of coal be laid open, of working the whole of that portion of the coal tract level free, a circumstance of material importance to the operative miner, as well as to the proprietor of the soil.
These views may prove useful, whenever the exploring of this hitherto untrodden region shall be undertaken in a systematic and economical manner; a period, however, which might perhaps appear far distant, if we looked merely to a supply of fuel for local consumption, since the vast tract of peat-bog covering the greater part of the coal-field, and extending from Mount Callan to Loop Heatf, is provided with a store of that useful combustible which seems almost inexhaustible.
  In the State of New York, the carboniferous limestone reposes partly on old red sandstone, partly on transition rocks. At the northern extremity, the old red sandstone which lines the south coast of Lake Ontario, from the west of the Niagara to the east of the Oswego river, distinctly underlies the limestone-shale, and limestone from Queenstown, by the gorge of the river Niagara upward to within two hundred yards of the ferry below the Falls of Niagara, having a gentle dip throughout to the southward. The same relative position is observable west of Lockport, in proceeding east from Lewisiown by the line of road leading to Rochester; also in the Genesee river north of the latter town, and in the course of the Oswego river. To the east of the Oswego, the old red sandstone reposes on transition rocks, and, being deflected to the south-east, on approaching the Helderberg mountains, it appears to be overlapped and concealed by the carboniferous limestone, the latter then coming in contact with the transition rocks on the east, which range from Canada to the southward: while still more south, in Pennsylvania, the coal measures appear to overlap the carboniferous limestone on the east, and to come also in direct contact with the transition rocks. In tracing, from north to south, the order of succession, from the carboniferous limestone to the superincumbent coal measures, the same low angle of inclination to the south is observable from Niagara in the direction of Buffalo, and thence along part of the south-east coast of Lake Erie. The same disposition is likewise to be remarked, in passing south by the lakes of Cayuga, Seneca, &c, whose waters find a common outlet on the north by the river Oswego. South of those lakes, the land rises rapidly by an accumulation of coal measures, forming the northern aspect of the Alleghany mountains, and the southerly dip is still observable. These beds form an alternating series, distinguished by the prevalence of red shales and red sandstones with beds of sandstone conglomerate and limestone interposed, but in which coal has hitherto been rarely met with; while in the higher regions this series supports and includes the abundant deposits of coal which occur on the northern confines of Pennsylvania, in the anthracitous coal-field of Carbondale.
(76.) In the Old Red Sandstone.—The only spot in which I have met with metal in any material quantity in this rock in Ireland, is in the northern face.
The main body of carboniferous limestone, which thus underlies the series just noticed, extends from Lake Erie in an easterly direction through the State of New York to the Helderberg mountain, situated about 20 miles S.W. of Albany. Here its course is inflected to the south and southwest, and from the Helderberg mountain it has been traced 120 miles upon that line, extending into Pennsylvania on the right bank of the Delaware river, and flanked throughout on the east by transition rocks. It thus supports the bituminous coal measure series of the Alleghany and Catskill mountains on the north and the east, and incloses and supports on the east also the anthracitous deposits of Carbondale, Lackawanna, and Wyoming, as above stated. The southern border of the carboniferous limestone, intersects in its range, the lakes Seneca and Cayuga, and near the heads of those lakes, on the south, thin layers of bituminous coal have been found in the coal measures; and again further east in Otsego county, in the shale lying above the limestone. In like manner, narrow seams of bituminous coal have been met with in the Catskill range bordering on the river Schoharrie; and again in the southern part of the same range in Ulster county, varying from eight to twenty-two inches in thickness, the beds being here in some places horizontal, but in general slightly inclined to the westward. To what extent other seams of coal may occur in the higher accumulation of tfyese coal measures, subjacent to the great anthracitous and bituminous deposits of Pennsylvania above noticed, remains yet to be proved.
Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Ohio, the continuous coal-bearing measures include, not unfrequently intercalated beds of limestone, which often contain marine animal remains; and the sandstone and shale accompanying the coal, contain also in some places marine shells and other remains'. Some of the coal measures are said also to exhibit in places fossil freshwater shells; and in this series also, beds of sandstone conglomerate are not of uncommon occurrence. The continuous coal-bearing measures extend from the region of the Great Kanawha river to the south-west through Western Virginia, and the eastern parts of Kentucky and Tenessee into the northern parts of Alabama, and to the north-east, as above stated, through Pennsylvania into the State of New York. But the main body of the carboniferous limestone, forms the great basis of the coal series. Yet, even in that main body, valuable beds of coal are found adjacent to the lower parts of the Ohio river in Kentucky, Indiana, and Illinois, and near the conflence of the Missouri with the Mississippi.
  In the association of beds of limestone with the coal-bearing measures, we perceive an analogy to similar pheenomena, in parts of the coal tracts of the North of England and of Scotland; while in the appearance of beds of coal low down in the carboniferous limestone, we find a parallel also in Northumberland, in the North of England.
  In its western extent into Arkansas, the carboniferous limestone appears to be supported partly by the old red sandstone, and partly by a greywacke tract; while in the higher regions of the territories of Arkansas and Missouri, it supports extended continuous coal tracts.
(77.) In the Carboniferous Limestone.—The portion of the limestone field contained in the Map, has hitherto yielded no important ground for mining operations; but those which have been carried on, afford some instructive examples of the modes, in which metal is lodged in the formation.
This distribution of the coal in Pennsylvania, anthracitous on the east and bituminous on the west, may be compared with the coal deposits in South Wales, where the eastern portions are bituminous and the western anthracitous; and again with those in Ireland, where the northern deposits are bituminous, and the southern anthracitous. But both the Welsh and Irish coal-fields belong to the great carboniferous order; and I anticipate that such also will be admitted to be the case with respect to the Pennsylvania, which point indeed, in reference to the north-eastern parts of that State, appears to me fully established by Professor Eaton, though obscured by a peculiar diction. The mere quality of coal, as being anthracitous, cannot alone be considered a decisive criterion of its antiquity, though so conceived by some geologists. On the other hand, however, it may be asked, is there any well-authenticated instance of abed of bituminous coal having ever yet been found within the limits of the transition system I am not aware of such.
  I will here only add the general remark, that if the land of the United States be rich in the vegetable productions of warm and temperate climates, it is no less so in the exuberance of its mineral stores, of which the chief are its inexhaustible deposits of coal and iron, the mainsprings of arts and manufactures. In the possession of such treasures, combined with a spirit of activity fostered by free institutions, and the natural and gradually improving facilities of internal and external communication, our American brethren may well aspire to the attainment of a state of greatness and prosperity, not readily brought within the compass of human calculation. (May 1837.)
(78.) The Annagh Mine near Castlemaine was discovered about the year 1788, wrought during three years, and then abandoned. Two years afterwards the works were visited by Mr. Raspe, a German miner of reputation, who left a written report dated 4th October, 1793, the substance of which is, "that the mine having yielded 400 tons of argentiferous galena, of the "value of 15/. to 17/. per ton, from workings which did not exceed twelve fathoms in depth; "and great lumps and masses of ore, lead, and spar, left in the hillocks affording additional evidence "of a valuable deposit, he strongly recommended a resumption of the undertaking, though "doubtful whether the operations had been conducted on a bed or a vein."
The works were accordingly resumed in the year 1825, and the general results may be seen in the subjoined plan and sections.
The whole quantity of ore obtained by these researches, amounted only to 9 tons 2 cwt. 2 qrs. of lead ore, and a few tons of blende; and the works were in consequence discontinued. The lead ore produced 68 per cent, of lead, and the lead yielded 43 ounces 11 dwts. and 3 grains of silver per ton. The other metallic substances which incidentally appeared, were pyrites of iron, copper, and arsenic, and iron ochre. The whole may be said to have formed a discontinuous, metalliferous pipe, or erect contemporaneous mass.
(79.) From the limestone, about half a mile north of Tralce, which is there disposed in horizontal strata, seventeen tons of lead ore were extracted in the year 1718, and chiefly, as it would appear, from interrupted layers in the rock.
Lead ore was also found in working a limestone quarry north of Ardfcrt Abbey in the year 1793, but further research was prevented by the lord of the soil. The part of the heap remaining, consists of masses of quartz, containing lumps of galena, calcareous spar, blende, iron ochre, and traces of the blue and green carbonates of copper.
(80.) A few miles north of Rathkeale, in the townland of Ballintreddcdy, has latterly been found in the limestone, a vein, three or four, or perhaps more, feet wide, consisting of calcareous spar, antimonial galena, earthy carbonate of lead and oxide of antimony, grey copper ore, antimonial copper ore, blue and green carbonates of copper, and blende. But it has only been touched upon, the proprietor delaying to make adequate researches.
(81.) In the townlands of Curraghanadecly and Ballingaranc, a few miles also north of Rathkeale, the limestone strata gently undulate from east to west, and adjacent to the line of parting between them, the rock is in some places metalliferous, containing an intermixture of galena, blende, iron pyrites, and ochre, a few inches in thickness; and to these substances is, in someplaces, superadded calcareous spar, from six to twelve inches thick: but in neither case does the deposit form a distinct bed. Some calamine also incidentally occurs with the other ingredients. These appearances gave rise to superficial mining operations, which were not attended with advantage.
(82.) To the north of Askeaton, and within a quarter of a mile of the Shannon, in the townland of Ballystein, the limestone contains a bed, dipping 50° to the north, composed of calcareous spar and quartz, bearing lead ore, copper, and iron pyrites, and some blende, and varying from four to sixteen inches in thickness. It was tried upon the range by shallow works eighty fathoms in length, and by two sinkings upon the underlie, of twelve and seventeen fathoms' depth respectively, yet apparently without success.
  (83.) In the Coal Formation.—I am not aware of any material metallic deposit having been found either in the North or South Munster coal tracts, beside that of the clay ironstone. But this substance appears so thinly scattered in the coal shales of both districts, that it will probably be scarcely available for the manufacture of iron; for which purpose also the coal is for the greater part wholly unfit, being commonly deteriorated by iron pyrites.
  I may mention, however, that a trial for lead was made a few years since on the le,ft bank of the Shannon, south of the river Cashen, on the townland of Mineghane. The cliffs at the place examined, consist of alternating thin beds of brown sandstone and sandy shale, gently undulated both in the line of range and dip, and exhibiting occasionally, though very rarely, a few impressions of indistinct bivalves. In these beds may be sometimes observed a layer of quartz, carious or crystallized, and in a few places small veins of the same substance, both bearing iron ochre, and occasionally small portions of galena; but seldom reaching to a few inches in thickness, and commonly to not more than one or two inches. Analogous trials were made also in Knockpoge West, about half a mile inland from the Shannon. The object of research was in each case unimportant.
(84.) General Observation on segregated metallic deposits. The details which I have given of incidental, metalliferous appearances in various parts of the counties of Waterford, Cork, Kerry, Limerick, and Clare1, are corroborative of a remark which I formerly made; that the diffusion of metallic substances through the mass of rocks (especially of the primary, transition, and carboniferous epochs), is far from being an uncommon occurrence; appearing in isolated particles or portions of greater magnitude, or in layers, veins,
(85.) 1 cannot conclude these outlines of the mineral constitution of the South of Ireland more appropriately, than by briefly adverting to the distribution of diluvial matter,—a phenomenon which uniformly presses upon the attention of the geologist, whatever be the country or climate in which he may wander. In illustration of the field comprised in the map (Plate II.), a few instances may suffice, taken in different portions, of the southern and northern quarters.
(86.) In Kerry, deep deposits of rolled debris, in the form of boulders, gravel, and sand, more or less commingled with clay, and derived from the general transition series, are lodged around the circuit, penetrate the defiles, and ascend some height up the flanks, of those magnificent mountain groups which distinguish this county, so celebrated for the picturesque scenery which it enfolds within its bosom. On the other hand, on the external borders, marked by the junction of the transition and carboniferous series, the deposits are of a more mingled character, being derived from the superficial destruction of both systems of strata.
Analogous accumulations may be observed also on the confines and in the interior of the carboniferous series. That which occurs on the northern face and at the foot of Slieve Meesh, is an example, composed of the debris of the old red sandstone (§. 49.). Another may be noticed at the western extremity of Kerry Head. The abrupt precipices which there brave the assaults of the Atlantic, are from 80 to 150 feet high, and are generally covered by a mass of sandstone boulders, gravel, sand, and clay; but on the highest cliff, which also forms the extreme western point, the diluvial deposit consists almost wholly of the detritus of limestone, extending to the depth of thirty feet, and containing but few sandstone pebbles. Now, no fixed limestone rock is found nearer than seven miles, and is there in a lower position, being little elevated above the level of the sea. The surface of the coal tract itself is generally covered, to a greater or less depth, by rolled debris, imbedded in clay, and derived from the harder as well as the softer portions of the coal strata; but on the borders these are more or less commingled with the detritus of the adjacent limestone.
(87.) In Tipperary, Limerick, and Cork, in the clayslate and greywacke district, which occupies the lower grounds between the Gaultees range on the south and that of the Slievenamuck, Slieve Riagh, and Seefin on the north, and upholds on each side mountain masses of old red sandstone (§. 48.), are several quarries of roofing-slate, covered by a considerable accumulation, consisting of clay, in which are imbedded numerous boulders and pebbles of slate, greywacke, sandstone, and limestone, and not a few of greenstone porphyry, red felspar porphyry, and purplish claystone porphyry. The first four enumerated kinds of rolled debris, have evidently been derived from the fixed rocks of the immediate neighbourhood. But whence have the porphyries been derived? To find analogous rocks in situ we must travel some distance to the north ; where they are to be found in association with the carboniferous limestone of Lough Gur, Kilteely, and Pallis.
(88.) The last case I shall notice is in the peninsula of Renville, the western extremity of which, is by land about four miles from Oranmore, and by sea about the same distance from the town of Galway. It forms a low tongue, the base of which is carboniferous limestone, but the surface is mostly occupied by a considerable deposit of limestone gravel and marl, inclosing numerous boulders and pebbles of red and grey granite, syenite, greenstone, and sandstone. This case corresponds perfectly with the preceding. The limestone gravel may be said to be the produce of the immediate subsoil; but the granite, syenite, and greenstone, if not the sandstone also, must have been drifted from the northern side of the bay of Galway, where they constitute an extensive district.
(89.) These instances may suffice to show, that the evidences of diluvial action are no less conspicuous in the South of Ireland than in the other parts of the world, to which observation has extended. And, from the last two cases mentioned above, it might be inferred, that the general current of the waters was from the N.W. to the S.E.; a view which, making allowances for eddies produced by intervening obstacles, is in accordance with my remarks on the East of Ireland1: and I may add also with those of Mr. Bryce in the North, as since ably developed, by that author, in his memoir on diluvial action in the North of Ireland.

