SINCE my return to Europe, after an absence of nearly three years, among the scientific publications that have attracted my attention, the Journal of the Geological Society of Dublin claimed particular notice. I rejoiced to perceive a growing spirit of geological inquiry in Ireland, and more especially as that spirit is understood to have been mainly excited and promoted by the Trigonometrical Survey of the island now in progress under the able conduct of Colonel Colby, R.E.
It was, however, with surprise and regret that I read the following passage in the Address delivered at the First Annual Meeting of that Society by their President. Speaking of the natural resources of Ireland, the learned author says: "Even native gold was found not many years ago in a neighbouring county in large wedges. It was discovered in a limited portion of a stream of about one hundred yards in extent; and though the stream was repeatedly examined up to the mountain from which it descended, not a trace of the metal could be perceived in any other part; yet, notwithstanding this circumstance, the mountain itself was presumed to be the chief depository: it was accordingly perforated quite through, with great labour and at an enormous expense; and the search conducted in this way having proved unsuccessful, was finally abandoned. The limited portion of the stream in which any gold could be discovered, we might suppose, should have directed to the adjacent banks, and the hills which rise from the spot on either side. These might have been explored at much less expense; and judging by the uncommonly great size of some of the lumps which had been found, it seems not unreasonable to expect, notwithstanding the past disappointment, that much will hereafter be brought to light."
A judgment thus gravely pronounced from a presidential chair demands attention. From what source the deliverer of that sentence drew his information does not appear; yet certainly a more strange misapprehension of facts has seldom been embodied in words. In justice to the Government under whose auspices I had the honour to act, as well as to the memories of the individuals concerned in directing the operations (of whom I am the only survivor), it becomes incumbent on me to disabuse the public by recalling their attention to the real circumstances of the case; and this I might briefly do by a simple reference to the succinct and faithful history I have given of the proceedings in my memoir on the East of Ireland, published in the 5th volume of the Geological Transactions, First Series. But as those Transactions are, comparatively speaking, in the hands of few persons, it appears expedient to enter into some details, through the medium of a scientific Journal of extensive circulation; for which purpose I subjoin the following extracts from my memoir on the East of Ireland, merely transposing a few passages for the sake of greater distinctness.
The discovery of native gold in the Ballinvalley stream at Croghan Kinshella mountain was accidental; and, as it subsequently proved, the principal depot of the gold in that stream extended about twelve hundred yards below the ford. In other quarters the gold obtained was comparatively of small amount. The largest piece found in any of the other streams was on the Coolbawn side. It weighed 2 ounces. But in all these cases the gold was accompanied by most of the metallic substances that occurred in the Ballinvalley stream, and which will be enumerated hereafter. Under the Act of Parliament for managing the undertaking, the directors established regular stream-works; and up to the unhappy period of the rebellion in May 1798, when the works were destroyed, Government had been fully reimbursed its advances, the produce of the undertaking having defrayed its own expenses, and left a surplus in hand. In the year 1801, the operations were resumed, when the directors proposed to Government not to confine its views to the mere collection of the alluvial gold, but to extend the researches, directing them more particularly toward the discovery of auriferous veins. They were justified, as they conceived, in this proposition by the following considerations:
"1. The well-known fact, that in the various quarters of the world, in America, Africa, Asia, and Europe, auriferous veins often occur in the mountains adjacent to the districts that abound in massy alluvial gold.
"2. The peculiar circumstances under which the native gold of Croghan Kinshela was found.—It occurred in massy lumps, and in small pieces, down to the minutest grain. One piece weighed twenty-two ounces, another eighteen ounces, a third nine ounces, and a fourth seven ounces. The gold was found, accompanied by other metallic substances, dispersed through a kind of stratum composed of clay, sand, gravel, and fragments of rock, and covered by soil, which sometimes attained to a very considerable depth, from twenty to fifty feet, in the bed and banks of the different streams. By the operations in the stream-works, (which are too well known to professed miners to need detail on the present occasion,) all the metallic particles thus disseminated were collected in a concentrated mass; and in those at Ballinvalley it was constantly found that the gold was attended by magnetic ironstone, sometimes in masses of half a hundred weight, by magnetic ironsand, by cubical and dodecahedral iron pyrites; and, in small pieces and grains, by specular iron ore, brown and red ironstone, iron ochre, fragments of tinstone crystals, wolfram, gray ore of manganese, pieces of quartz and chlorite, and sometimes fragments of quartz crystals. I observed and collected also some specimens, which show that the gold, magnetic ironstone, and wolfram were each of them frequently intermingled with quartz; and I have also a few specimens which exhibit the gold not only incorporated with iron ochre, but ramifying in slight threads through wolfram. Some of the gold, though very rarely, occurred crystallized in octohedrons, and also in the elongated garnet dodecahedron, of which I retain specimens.
"3. The ascertained fact that several of the contemporaneous veins of quartz, contained in the mountain, were metalliferous, yielding magnetic ironstone, iron pyrites, copper pyrites, blende and iron ochre, with chlorite and quartz crystals.
"Under these considerations, the measures proposed by the directors were: to continue the stream-works, progressively advancing toward the head of the several streams; to examine more closely the solid mass of the mountain, by means of trenches to be cut in various directions down to the firm rock; to explore more fully the veins already known, and those which might be discovered near the surface by the trenches; and lastly, to try these veins, at a considerable depth from the surface, by means of a gallery or level, to be driven into the mountain, in a direction nearly at right angles with the general range of the veins, selecting that quarter where they appeared to be most numerous.
"These measures receiving the sanction of Government, they were carried into effect; and numerous trials were made by driving and sinking on the veins previously known and subsequently discovered. By the Ballin valley trench alone twenty-seven veins of quartz were found, varying from nine inches to four feet wide, in a distance of 700 fathoms; and in the same manner, by the Ballinagore trench, eighteen quartz veins were discovered in a distance of 600 fathoms. These veins partly range and dip with the slaty rock, but they also ramify and terminate in strings which intersect the latter. They are evidently contemporaneous, and most of them are barren, but some were found bearing magnetic ironstone, iron pyrites, and iron ochre, with chlorite. Two of the most powerful veins occur on the western side of the northern arm of the mountain, one being six feet wide in the broadest part, and the other four feet. They consist principally of massive magnetic ironstone and quartz, with disseminated copper pyrites, and iron pyrites. A similar vein, four or five feet wide, with the addition of blende, occurs near the extremity of the northern arm, and another, two and a half feet wide, appears in the face of the rock over the Daragh river." In the Geological Map of Croghan Kinshela mountain , it may be seen that the level driven into the mountain, nearly at right angles with the general range of the veins, extended 178 fathoms in length.
"The mineral substances obtained by these various operations were subjected to experimental processes both by fire and amalgamation; but in no instance was a particle of gold elicited from them either by the one or the other process. So unsatisfactory a result led to the persuasion, that the gold formed no part of the veins which appear in the mountain; and hence Government were induced to abandon the enterprise.
"The same conclusion seems to apply to the tinstone, wolfram, and manganese, in discovering which the mining operations equally failed. What is, then, the primary source of these substances found detached in the beds and banks of the streams? It is not improbable that they occur more or less scattered and disseminated through the rocks of the mountain, although it must be acknowledged that no discovery leading to this inference attended the researches of Government. It is, however, well known, that such occurrences are not uncommon in other tracts; and we may, then, conceive the gold and the other metallic substances to have been detached from their native seat, and to have been lodged in their present position, in company with other alluvial materials, at the time of the first formation of soil, upon the retrocession of the ocean.
"The total quantity of native gold collected by Government amounted to 944 ounces 4 pennyweights and 15 grains, producing when sold 3675 pounds; the ingots having yielded from 21f to 2 J J carats of fine gold, the alloy being silver."
"§ 107. But the discovery of native gold was not confined to Croghan Kinshela. Trials were instituted by the directors in another mountain also, namely Croghan Moira, about seven miles distant from the former mountain, and gold was obtained there, though in very small quantity, the largest piece not exceeding two and a half pennyweights in weight. One trial was made on Ballycreen in the stream at the eastern foot of the mountain, and minute particles of gold were found, accompanied by magnetic ironstone, magnetic ironsand, compact brown ironstone, cubical iron pyrites, and numerous small garnets. Another trial was made on the western side of the mountain, in Ballynacapogue brook, and small particles of gold were obtained, with magnetic ironstone, magnetic ironsand, and fragments of tinstone crystals. A third trial, in Fannanerin stream, on the north-eastern flank of the mountain, did not produce any gold."
The preceding extracts may serve to show how untenable are the positions advanced in the statement of the distinguished President. They prove,
1. That the discovery of native gold was not confined to a limited portion of a stream of about one hundred yards in extent.
2. That gold was found in other parts, and in other streams proceeding from the same mountain; and indications to this effect are given in the Map of Croghan Kinshela mountain.
3. That the mountain was not perforated through, nor with great labour, nor at an enormous expense. And the sole object of a level, which was driven 178 fathoms long into the mountain, was to try in depth veins found by trenching at the surface. The moderate expense of such a level passing through a clayslate rock (and that rock dipping toward, and thus favouring the progress of the level,) any competent miner may readily compute.
4. That the adjacent banks and hills rising on either side were attended to; for in fact the mountain was scarified by trenches on every side, cut down to the live rock; and many veins were discovered in consequence, upon which workings were conducted, and the produce subjected to repeated experiments. These veins were thus explored at the least expense.
With this plain statement of facts I forbear comment, merely adding that I am persuaded that few, if any, Government undertakings have ever been conducted in a more economical manner, or at so little charge to the public. The great object was to determine, according to the approved principles of practical miners, whether auriferous veins existed in the mountain; and the negative appearing to be proved, Government were induced to relinquish the enterprise. Prior to the operations of Government, my friends had joined me in a proposition to embark in the adventure ourselves, yielding to the Crown one fifth part of the produce. Apprehensive that the subject might become too rich, that proposition was rejected. The result of the subsequent researches, however, gave us reason to be content that our offer had not been accepted by Government.
The publication of this article has been delayed in the hope of recovering the plate of the Geological Map of Croghan Jtinsheln mountain, which would have thrown a clearer light on the subject; but as, unfortunately, that plate is not forthcoming, I must necessarily refer in this respect to the 5th volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society, First Series. 

See Plate XI. of the 5th volume of the Geological Transactions. That Map serves not only to elucidate the geological relations of the mountain, but also to explain the nature of the mining operations which were carried on there; the whole being laid down from actual survey.




