
  IN my former papers, I endeavoured to elucidate the subject of the rothetodtliegende formation, as well as that of the weissliegende, in such a manner as might obviate all further misconception or doubt;  not by gratuitous assumption, but by strict induction from the observations and descriptions of those who have best studied the subject in Germany; at the head of whom stands Freiesleben. In conducting this discussion, it has been my object constantly to bear in mind that the solution of a problem cannot be valid, unless it embrace all the conditions necessarily belonging to it; nor the sense of an author be justly given, unless the scope of his argument be fully considered in all its branches and bearings. Partial views generally lead to false results. Yet it seems I have failed in conveying conviction where I particularly wished to impress it. Nor is it difficult to account for the failure, since my opponent persists in attaching a meaning to the word rothetodtliegende, for which I confess 1 can find no adequate German authority. However averse to controversy, a desire of supporting and vindicating the true state of the case, impels me once more to resume the pen.
Mr. Conybeare insists that the rothetodtliegende is the equivalent of the calcareous or new conglomerate of England, overlying the carboniferous series; and he even contends that Freiesleben considers and treats the rothetodtliegende and the true coal formation as appertaining to two different series; adding, that the invariable order in ascending is, 1. Coal formation. 2. Porphyry. 3. Rothetodtliegende; and sections are quoted from Keferstein, as demonstrative of this position.
  I have maintained that the weissliegende alone (and not the rothetodtliegende) is the representative of the calcareous or new conglomerate of England. The general description of the new conglomerate is to be found in the Annals of Philosophy for November, 1821, and more at large in Freiesleben, vol. iii. p. 239 —280. It is to that author the Germans owe the clear exposition of the true character of the weissliegende, and the proof that it belongs to a newer series than the carboniferous; while almost all preceding German writers had considered the weissliegende as the uppermost bed of that series, and included it accordingly, and some even had called it rothliegende. But to continue so to apply the latter denomination is obviously to persevere in an antiquated error, exploded by Freiesleben. And conversely, to call the true rothetodtliegende the new conglomerate, and then to build on this misapplication of the term, is a sure method to render a subject, otherwise simple and clear, involved and confused; and thus calculated to mislead both the writer and reader, confirming the remark of Bacon, that "while men believe their reason governs their words; it often happens, that words have power enough to react upon reason."
  I have maintained that the rothetodtliegende formation is the equivalent of the carboniferous series, extending from the old red sandstone to the coal formation inclusive, or vice versa. Now to prove that Freiesleben's own view of the matter is identical with that which I have given, I think it will be sufficient, in addition to the facts detailed in my former papers, to transcribe in this place the Synoptical Table of that author, prefixed to his fourth volume, which exhibits the method according to which he considers and treats this subject; and then to offer a few remarks intermingled with such illustrative extracts from the body of die work, as bear more immediately on the question.
With this Synoptical Table fora guide, and Freiesleben's descriptions in illustration, it has been a great surprise to me that any one should ever have doubted that the older sandstone, or rothetodtliegende formation of the Germans, was the representative of the carboniferous series.
  After the details into which I have formerly entered, the more immediate remarks required on the preceding synoptical table may be confined, first, to the rothliegende separately considered; and secondly, to the nature of its connexion veith the coal formation. 
  It may be useful in this place to refer to the origin of the expression rothetodtliegende, or red dead Iter. It has been applied to the carboniferous series in general for this reason; that in some quarters the coal formation associated with red sandstone as one of its members; in others, the old red sandstone itself (both more or less strongly characterised by the diffusion of red oxide of iron), form the immediate support of the weissliegende or new conglomerate, and bituminous marl shale, the two former thus acting in relation to the two latter as the red dead lier; that is, as the red substratum, comparatively barren of metal, in contradistinction to the superincumbent new conglomerate and bituminous marl shale, both of which are abundantly metalliferous.
  I may here repeat the remark, which I made in a former paper,- that the expressions todtliegende, rothliegende, and rothetodtliegende, are synonymous, the two former being frequently employed for the sake of brevity.
  
  1. Now with respect to the rothliegende considered separately,f we pay due attention to its physical characters, and to its relative position, affinities, and graduations, I know not how it is possible to resist the evidence thus afforded, that it represents, in its lowest position, the old red sandstone of English geologists.
The general characters of the beds composing the rothliegende as consisting of conglomerate, breccia, sandstone, slaty micaceous sandstone, indurated slaty clay, and clay marl, have been given in the Annals of Philosophy for Aug. 1822, p. 84—86; and I there adverted to their agreement with those of the old red sandstone of Gloucestershire (and of the adjoining counties), and also of that of Ireland. But no where is the analogy to be found more complete in all its parts than in the old red sandstone of Scotland, particularly that portion of it which borders the northern side of the Scotch great coal tract. I know no other portion of the carboniferous series, with which the rothliegende in its lowest position can be said to correspond so perfectly.
With regard to the relative position and affinities of the rothliegende, the following extracts from Freiesleben may suffice.
Vol. iv. p. 107, et seq. "The rothliegende is always bounded on the one side by one or the other member of the cupriferous shale tract, lying generally immediately below the calcareous or new conglomerate (weissliegende) or the cupriferous marl shale; but its confines on the other side are less determinate. Here it graduates principally into tracts of greywacke and clayslate, or porphyry, accordingly as it reposes upon, or forms basins in, one or the other of them."
  The two descriptions agree so perfectly as to answer nearly one for the other.
  To render the above paragraph perfectly clear to the English reader, it is necessary to bear in mind that the red sandstone of the coal tracts of Germany, bears the name of rothliegende as well as the fundamental portion of the carboniferous series, namely, the old red sandstone. In point of position, the former might be partly compared to the red sandstone found in some of the English coal fields, which, appearing at intervals, sometimes forms beds of great thickness and extent, dividing the more common coal bearing strata from each other, and partly known by the name of pennantstone, e. g. in the Gloucestershire south coal field. It is one of the peculiarities of several of the coal fields in the north of Germany, that coarse red conglomerate and red sandstone are found frequently alternating on a greater or smaller scale with the other coal measures, the former partly resembling analogous beds in the fundamental old red sandstone. This is particularly observable in Lower Silesia, where a bed of coarse red conglomerate generally forms the immediate roof of the coal seams; a bed of slate clay of seven feet in thickness being there a rare occurrence. 
  Generally speaking, the rothliegende seems the more disposed to receive foreign ingredients into its composition, as well as beds, the nearer it approaches to the fundamental rocks upon which it reposes. And it is not to be denied that it possesses many points of agreement with transition tracts; so much so, that some geologists are disposed to rank it rather with the transition series, and to commence the floetz series only with the rocks peculiarly belonging to the bituminous or cupriferous marl shale   (of which the weissliegende, or new conglomerate, is the first or lowest member).
The connexion of the rothliegende with transition greywacke and clayslate tracts, is exemplified by a reference to the districts of Mannsfeld, Sangerhausen, and Stollberg, where it reposes upon, and partly graduates into them.
  Its connexion with porphyry (trap also occurring in the association), is stated to be particularly well exhibited in the Forest of Thuringia, the two formations not only alternating with, but appearing in a manner diffused in each other; e. g. in the northem deckvity of the Schneekopf, and again extending from the Grossen Buche into the Schmiickengraben in the same mountain. Its intimate alliance with porphyry is shown also in Mannsfeld.
  In all these cases, the ingredients which compose the rothliegende are said to vary more or less according to the constitution of the transition or primary tracts upon which it reposes.— 
Both relative position and physical characters, therefore, fnrove that the rothliegende constitutes, in its lowest position, the undamental portion of the series, or what is designated in England as the old red sandstone.
  2. The same inference is to be drawn, from considering the connexion of the rothliegende with the coal formation.
  On this subject, Freiesleben (see p. 170—172 of vol. iv.) adverts, in the first place, to the distinctions formerly made in Germany respecting the relation of the coal formation to the rothliegende; some writers having considered a portion only of the coal formation as included in the rothliegende, while others incorporated the whole of the coal formation with the rothliegende; thus constituting, instead of one group with two divisions, one simple unbroken series. As an exemplification of the latter mode of considering the subject, he produces the arrangement of Karsten, who gives the following beds as a type of the general series, taken in an ascending order.
Now what is the observation of Freiesleben upon this series. He says it is too general, and not sufficiently distinct, and, therefore, for the sake of greater clearness and precision, he considers it necessary to describe the rothliegende and the coal formation under separate heads; and he arranges the subject accordingly, as displayed in the synoptical table, leaving for his third and last division the account of the occurrence and distribution of the series in general.
  It is obvious from the structure of that table, that coal is considered by him in a general point of view as a member of the older sandstone orrothetodtliegende Series; and so far he continues to adhere to the arrangement of his predecessors. But he aualines this general view by a more particular one, expressed in the following words: "I have throughout my present exposition considered the rothliegende and the true coal tracts (eigentliche steinkohlengebirge, with siliceous conglomerate, slate-clay, and bituminous shale), as two very closely allied formations, but whichought nevertheless to be distinguished from each other. And hence in my descriptions I always make a distinction between the true coal tracts, and those single beds of coal that occur incidentally subordinate to the rothliegende." This particular view, however, does not invalidate his general position; namely, that all the true coal tracts are comprehended in the older sandstone or rothetodtliegende series; an arrangement in which all German geologists have always concurred. This state of the case is proved, not only by the synoptical table, but by the words of the author's text, from which I subjoin the following extracts:
  The series given above is also quoted by Mr. Conybeare, on which that gentleman observes, "If we look among these rocks for the representative of our own old red sandstone, it must be sought in No. 1 and 2, not in No. 11; an observation in which I perfectly agree with him, since it is one of the points for which I have been contending; in confirmation of which I have to observe, that No. 1 and 2 of that series do in fact represent the loieert portion of the rothliegende of Freiesleben.
But that Karsten's group is to be considered as a general type of the older sandstone series, and not as expressing with precision the order of succession throughout, appears evident from the introduction of trap rocks and clay ironstone under Nos. 9 and 10. The two principal members of the series are first expressed, namely, the old red sandstone by No. 1 and 2, and the coal formation by No. 3 to 8. Then trap and clay ironstone are noticed, the former as being incidental both to the old red sandstone and to the coal formation, and thelatter as more peculiarly belonging to the coal formation. With respect to the rothliegende, No. 11,1 must repeat that it is in this position a term, denoting the upper portion of the coal measures, where interstratified with and divided by red sandstone on a greater or smaller scale as one of its members. And lastly, with regard to the weissliegende No. 12, I must also repeat that this formation had been considered as the uppermost bed of the older sandstone series by most German writers, until Freiesleben demonstrated that it was the lowest member of the succeeding alpine limestone formation (answering to the English magnesian limestone), thus corresponding with the calcareous or new conglomerate of England.
  I have given the substance of these descriptions in the Annals of Philosophy, Aug. 1822, p. 87—89, to which I beg leave to refer the reader; and in relation to which I will here only add two other extracts.
   I avail myself of this opportunity to notice an oversight committed in transcribing the account of the lower coal field near Wettin (not Lobegiin, as stated by Mr. Cony- beare), by having inserted "rothe todtliegende," instead of "rothes thonartiges liegendes," as the lowest bed (No. IC) observed in that coal field. The error, however, is of no real importance, since the expression signifying an argillaceous bed of the rothliegende, it amounts to the same thing.
And the same observation is to be found in vol. i. p. 46.
  Yet with all these facts before him, Mr. Conybeare assures us, "that the plan of Freiesleben's work does not extend to the coal formation, properly so called." And why? Because that author has made a distinction between the single beds of coal that occur incidentally subordinate to the rothliegende, and the continuous coal tracts. With equal justice might it be said, that the plan of a writer on the north-east of England did not extend to the coal formation, properly so called, because a distinction was made between the single beds of coal incidentally disposed in the carboniferous limestone of that tract, and the continuous coal measures.
  I think it needless to repeat in this place what I have already stated in former communications concerning the occasional juxta-position of the old red sandstone and the coal formation, as well as concerning their association with limestone, porphyry, and trap, respectively.
There is, however, one part of the German description (adverted to above, p. 325) that requires distinct notice, since from the language employed, it has probably given rise to considerable misapprehension. It is where it is said, that a formation of coaly shale or coal is interposed in some districts between the rothliegende and the subjacent tracts of clayslate and greywacke, or porphyry; particularly in certain parts of the Forest of Thuringia. This representation seems to imply nothing more than that, in the general expanse of the carboniferous series, a part of the coal formation is itself in particular quarters in contact with transition or primary tracts. Yet, even in these cases, rothliegende is said to form the basis of the coaly shale or coal. See e. g. the account of the coaly shale near Goldlauter, in the Upper Trogberg, near Breitenbach, and other places, which indeed are considered by Von Hoff and Jacob as belonging to the coal formation (Freiesleben, vol. iv. p. 142—169). See also the local occurrences of coal in various parts of the Forest. (Ib. p. 179—191.) In several of these cases, both limestone and porphyry are associated in the series.
The preceding references and extracts from Freiesleben have, I conceive, clearly proved, that the rothetodtliegende series of the Germans is the representative of the carboniferous series of the English. And no where can I find any evidence in that author, by which it could be shown, that the rothetodtliegende series has any connexion beyond that of juxta-position with the weissliegende; a formation, which, corresponding both in physical characters and in relative position with the calcareous or new conglomerate of England, can alone be considered as forming the first member of the succeeding series; namely, of the gypseous and saliferous. The weissliegende, however, has, as already remarked, been sometimes called rothliegende by some German writers, and this misapplication of the term has thus also led to a confusion in description, which really does not exist in nature. And here, perhaps, Mr. Conybeare may find one of the sources of the misconception into which he has fallen.
 In stating that Von Buch and Reuss refer the true coal tracts of Silesia and Bohemia to the todtliegende fonnation, it is the intention of Freiesleben to show that they belong to the first floetz or carboniferous series, in contradistinction to formation! of coal of later origin (e, g. wood coal) also found in those countries.

From all that has been stated, it is evident that Freiesleben affords no support whatever to the position of my opponent; namely, that the rothetodtliegende is the equivalent of the calcareous or new conglomerate of England; and that which is attempted to be derived from the sections of Keferstein must, for the same reasons, appear invalid. The order noticed there in ascending is, it seems, 1. Coal formation; 2. Porphyry; 3. Rothliegende; 4. Alpine, or lower limestone formation; 5. New red sandstone.
Upon this section I have to observe, in the first place, that the weissliegende or new conglomerate being by Freiesleben included in the alpine or lower limestone formation, I presume it is so included in No. 4 of this section; and consequently that the rothliegende No. 3 cannot be intended by Keferstein to be its representative. And, in the second place, Freiesleben having clearly shown the porphyry and coal to be comprehended in his general rothliegende series, the term rothliegende applies to the uppermost beds of the coal formation as well as to the lowest bed of the carboniferous series.f To exhibit, therefore, the coal formation, porphyry, and rothliegende, in the above order, as a type of the general series, is manifestly an imperfect mode of representing their mutual relations; since the rothliegende (as has been shown from Freiesleben) is found alternating with porphyry below the coal formation, and the coal formation itself occurs also alternating with porphyry. The fact appears to be that in the section adverted to above, Nos.5 and 4 (the latter of which comprehends also the new conglomerate as the lowest member) constitute together the saliferous and gypseous series; while Nos. 3, 2, and 1, belong to the carboniferous series, yet displayed in a manner that, so far from being luminous, conveys only an imperfect idea of the general subject. Of the two, the series presented by Karsten, though by no means complete (and from which the weissliegende must be excluded), is, as a general type of the rothetodtliegende formation, superior to that of Keferstein. Hasty generalizations and forced constructions, instead of promoting, tend rather to retard the progress of science; and correct approximations can only be produced by close comparisons, and a careful attention to those details that are but too often overlooked.
  I quote from Mr. Conybeare, not having myself yet seen Keferstein's memoirs. I presume these memoirs are compiled rather from the recorded observations of others than from original researches conducted by that author himself.
 See the preceding remarks and notes on this head.

  Mr. Conybeare has promised to produce detailed quotations from Lehman, Karsten, Von Buch, Von Humboldt, Freiesleben, Von Raurner, D'Aubuisson, and Keferstein (I place these names nearly in chronological order), all of which shall concur in proving, that the great mass of therothetodtliegende occupies a position superior to the coal measures. Now, supposing even that this were the case, it could be of no avail to the argument of my opponent, as rothetodtliegende does not signify the new conglomerate. It is doubtless owing to such a prepossession in the mind of that gentleman, that he has ventured to assert that the whole of the rothliegende (with its beds of limestone and porphyry), extending from the Hartz to the Petersberge on the Banks of the Saale, is in a position superior to the coal formation. I must, however, take the liberty of observing, that this statement appears wholly unjustified, being an inversion of the fact, and decidedly at variance with the detailed descriptions and general scope of Freiesleben's work.
My opponent seems to have been misled, and to have adopted this notion, partly by misconceiving the true import of a term, and partly by taking an imperfect view of the series connected with the coal in the Ihlefeld, Opperode, and Petersberge districts. In the first of these, which ranges to the south-east past Neustadt, the constituent members appear (so far as they are exposed) arranged in the following ascending order :
The real purport of the term rothliegende in this series has been already explained; and I need here only add, that the group (being succeeded by the weissliegende or new conglomerate, and the cupriferous marl shale), gradually thins off to the eastward, until in the district of Questenberg, the weissliegende comes in direct contact with the transition tract; so that in fact there is no visible connexion between the carboniferous rocks of Ihlefeld and Neustadt, and the old red sandstone which, proceeding from the Stollberg territory, ranges through Sangerhausen and Mannsfeld, and thence to the Banks of the Saale. But supposing a connexion to subsist between them (which is not improbable), though concealed by the newer floetz formations; if we take into account the disposition of the rocks of Ihlefeld and Neustadt, the range being north-west and south-east, and the dip south-west, and conceive them to be prolonged in the line of their south-eastern direction; it becomes evident, that they must be all in a position superior to the old red sandstone of Sangerhausen and Mannsfeld, yet belong nevertheless to the same series. On the other hand, the coal formation at Opperode appears, from the description of Freiesleben, to extend eastward to Meisdorf, and, perhaps, as far as Endorf, if not further, and to repose in that direction on the old red sandstone, which in its progress to the westward gradually thins off. The relative position of the Petersberge coal tract has been already clearly explained. For its description, as well as that of Opperode, see the Annals of Philosophy, Aug. 1822, p. 87—89.
Let us now admit my opponent's construction of Freiesleben, in the tract extending from the Hartz to the Petersberge on the Banks of the Saale,taken in a descending order, and see to what it leads:
  1. The rothliegende is the new conglomerate. It is covered by the weissliegende or calcareous conglomerate.
  N. B. From this it would appear as if the German series possessed a supernumerary new conglomerate.
  2. The rothliegende contains beds of porphyry, also beds of limestone, also single beds of coal.
  N. B. Impressions of monocotyledonous plants, considered as characteristic of the true coal formation, appear in this association.
  3. The whole of these are in a position superior to the coal formation, properly so called, which belongs to a different series.
  4. The plan of Freiesleben's work does not extend to the coal formation, properly so called.
  N. B. Yet the plan of Freiesleben's work does extend to the transition tracts, upon which the rothliegende, in its lowest position, is described as reposing, and into which it in a manner graduates. Therefore, if we were to combine these two views, the carboniferous series would seem to be excluded from the geological succession altogether. Yet it is admitted that
  5. True coal formations do occur in the districts of Ihlefeld, Opperode, and Petersberge; beside those which are found in Upper Saxony, Silesia, Bohemia, Thiiringerwald, &c.
   The general character of the weissliegende is that of a calcareous conglomerate, but it not unfrequently appears as a siliceous conglomerate. Hence, though sufficiently distinguished by other characters, it has been sometimes confounded with the rothliegende.
  
  
  
Now if we are to consider the coal formation, properly so called, and the carboniferous series in general, as excluded from the plan of Freiesleben's work (and as a necessary consequence from the works ofVonBuch, Reuss, Von Raumer, &c. also); I should wish to be informed in what book or books, and in what specific form of words, any description of the carboniferous series of Germany is to be met with?
Contrast these inconsistencies with the following simple view of Freiesleben, extending from the Hartz to the Banks of the Saale, taken in an ascending order, and for the abstracted details of which I refer to the descriptions given in the Annals of Philosophy, Aug. 1822, p. 83—91.
  1. The rothliegende, in its lowest position, reposes on the transition tracts, into which it graduates in a manner.
  N. B. It thus represents the old red sandstone of the English.
  2. The rothliegende contains incidentally single beds of coal, also beds of limestone, and beds of porphyry.
  N. B. Impressions of monocotyledonous plants occur in association with the coal.
  3. The preceding form the basis of the coal formation, properly so called.
  4. The coal formation, properly so called, consists of the usual coal measures, which alternate with beds of porphyry, and beds of rothliegende of greater or less extent (the latter being the red sandstone of the higher position).
  N. B. This red sandstone of the higher position is exclusively designated by Mr. Conybeare as the rothetodtliegende, and as the first member of the saliferous series, in direct opposition to the general language of Freiesleben. The remains of monocotyledonous plants occur in the above association; whereas those of dicotyledonous plants appear in the gypseous and saliferous series.
  All the preceding constitute together the older sandstone, or rothetodtliegende, formation or series.
  5. The weissliegende, or new conglomerate, overlies the rothetodtliegende series, from which it is wholly distinct, forming the first member of the gypseous and saliferous series. It contains no formation of coal, nor any formation of porphyry.
I think it needless to pursue this subject further; persuaded that the explanations already given of the expressions "the older sandstone, or rothetodtliegende formation," on the one hand, and the "weissliegende on the other, may supersede the necessity of further comment. Nor should I have been drawn thus far into controversy, had I not considered the exact determination of the question to be of primary importance, in ascertaining the true relations of a portion of the structure of the earth.
  The new conglomerate of England also contains no formation of coal, and probably none of porphyry either. I have given my reasons, on a former occasion, for suggesting that the conglomerate and sandstone associated with amygdaloidal trap in Devonshire, may be referable to a much earlier era.

Since, however, the term rothetodtliegende formation has been productive of so much misapprehension in the minds of foreigners, I venture to suggest to German geologists the expediency of abstaining from the use of it altogether. By whatever means a more perfect harmony might be established between the British and German descriptions, it could not fail to redound to the advantage of science. This object might be readily attained if German writers, adopting in part the language of English geologists, would for the future express the group by the term "first floetz, or carboniferous series," instead of "rothetodtliegende formation," and the individual members (whenever circumstances will admit of the distinctdivision) by those of " old red sandstone, carboniferous limestone, and coal formation." And, in like manner, both countries might speak the same language if the succeeding group were designated by the expression "second floetz, or gypseous and saliferous series," and its individual members by those of " calcareous conglomerate, lower alpine or gypseous limestone, and new red sandstone, formations."
  I shall close this paper by adverting to a few remarks contained in the memoir of Mr. Conybeare, referred to above, which require notice, being connected with the present question.
  1. My information respecting the Portishead case was derived from the "order of superposition of strata" of Prof. Buckland, appended to Phillips's Outlines of the Geology of England and Wales, 1818. I find that Mr. Greenough also rested on the same authority, when stating that imperfect coal in thin beds occurred in the lower part of the old red sandstone (See group, No. 22, of the Geological Map of England and Wales). But the position being now retracted, the quotation becomes of course invalid.
  2. It is stated by Mr. Conybeare, that "the coal seams which occur in the tract of the carboniferous limestone are reduced to slight traces, which have never yet been worked."
This statement does not correspond with the representation of Dr. Boué in Scotland, from which it appears that the greater number of the Scotch collieries are situated in that portion of the tract which abounds in limestone.
   E. g. Omalius d'Halloy, who has erroneously applied the term rothetodtliegende to conglomerates belonging to the gypseous and saliferous series.—(See that author's Geological View of the adjacent Parts of France and the Netherlands, in the 24th vol. of the Journal des Mines.)
  Von Raumer, in his description of the carboniferous series of Lower Silesia, the county of Glatz, and part of Bohemia and Upper Lusatia, avoids the expressions rothliegende, todtliegende, and rothetodtliegende altogether; designating the general series by the term " the red sandstone (rother sandstein) formation."
According to that author, the carboniferous series, designated by him under the general term of terrain du gres rouge, or la grande formation degres rouge,f appears to be arranged in the following order in the great coal tract of Scotland:
The old red sandstone, as the foundation of the whole, contains beds of trap and felspar rocks (partly porphyritic and amygdaloidal), with which it also alternates, and likewise some beds of limestone.
The lower portion of the coal formation is characterised by an inconsiderable quantity of coal, by variable masses of anthracite, by beds of trap and felspar rocks (partly porphyritic and amygdaloidal), by beds of limestone, and by sandstone that is sometimes of a reddish hue.
  In the upper portion of the coal formation, the trap beds seem gradually to disappear, and then follows only a fine series of coal measures, associated with numerous alternating beds of limestone. It is in this portion of the coal tract that the greatest number of the Scotch collieries are situated.
The uppermost portion of the coal formation is distinguished by the absence of beds of limestone, by its abundance of coal and of vegetable impressions, and by the appearance of shells resembling freshwater species. This portion of the tract, which most nearly agrees in its general relations with the great coal fields of England, is, however, of rare occurrence in Scotland, and appears to be confined to certain parts of Clackmannanshire, and the environs of Falkirk and St. Andrew's. Of the Clackmannanshire coal fields, a very able account has been given by Mr. Bald in the Wernerian Memoirs.
Dr. Boue dwells in particular ou the numerous beds of limestone that are distributed throughout the greater portion of the Scotch collieries, and on the few localities in the coal tract in which that mineral is found wanting.
  I have briefly referred to Dr. Boue's account of the coal fields of Scotland in my Comparative View in the Annals of Philosophy, Oct. 1821, and again in Aug. 1822.
  It was, I presume, from observing the intimate state of association prevailing among the different members of the carboniferous series in Scotland (the extreme fundamental part only being free from coal, and the extreme highest part only being destitute of limestone), that Prof. Jameson was induced to follow the German method by ranging the whole under one great head, entitled " the first floetz sandstone, or old red sandstone formation." Applied in this manner, the expression is equivalent to that of the " old or first floetz sandstone, or rotlietodtliegende formation," of the Germans, and to the "first floetz series," or "carboniferous series," of English geologists. These collective terms, like the "grande formation de grès rouge" of Dr. Boué, and "the red sandstone formation" of Von Raumer, are but various modes of expressing the same complex idea. The one, rightly understood, is as significant as the other. But the subdivisions adopted by English geologists, when applicable, render the subject more distinct.
   I subjoin the following extracts from Dr. Boué's Essai Géologique sur l'Ecosse, in which his general view of the coal formation of Scotland is exhibited.
  It is important both to the landed proprietor and the miner to know, that valuable seams of coal do sometimes occur within the domain of the carboniferous limestone; and in Scotland, it is manifest that the limestone and coal are frequently found in alternation. Nor is the carboniferous limestone of the northeast of England wholly free from them, as shown in Mr. Winch's valuable paper in the fourth volume of the Geological Transactions.
  I have upon former occasions adduced these and other examples to show, that though a general order may be every where perceived in the arrangement of the carboniferous series, yet that this order is subject to variation in detail in different countries, and even in the same tract of country. Now, it being established that in some countries the carboniferous limestone is productive of valuable seams of coal; if it happen in another country, that the carboniferous limestone is almost or entirely wanting, and the old red sandstone and coal formation are thus found in a state of juxta-position, why should it be thought improbable that the old red sandstone itself should contain incidentally single beds of coal? Applying this observation, the single beds of coal adverted to by Freiesleben as lying in the rothliegende, in contradistinction to the continuous coal tract, will be found to imply nothing more than the distinction now taken. It follows from all that has been advanced, that to lay down rigid rules with respect to the details of any particular series, forming part of the structure of the earth, so that they should be always applicable in the same manner in different countries, is to expect nature to appear in shackles, which she is not in the habit of wearing. The prevalence of a general order of succession is indisputable; but no less so is the variable state in which correlative members of the same series are associated together; being found in one country distinct from, and in another more or less frequently interstratified, with each other. Of this truth, the members of the carboniferous series afford many illustrative examples ; while the limestone forms in general the great connecting link between the fundamental old red sandstone free from coal, on the one hand, and the coal measures free from limestone, on the other.
When on the eve of transmitting the preceding pages to the press, the Annals of Philosophy for March, 1823, arrived, containing the continuation of Mr. Conybeare's interesting memoir. I perceive no reason to alter any thing that I have written, professing, as I do, to have faithfully expounded the positions of Freiesleben; positions quite in accordance with analogous relations in Great Britain. It is for those geologists who advocate doctrines in opposition to demonstrate their fallacy. Here, however, I cannot avoid complaining that, while the authority of Freiesleben is repeatedly appealed to in the course of this controversy, his distinctions are not only frequently suffered to pass without due attention, but his statements are tried by a language in a great measure foreign to his own. The work of Freiesleben should be judged not partially, but as a consistent whole, taken all together.
With great respect for my adversary, as well as for Prof. Buckland, I cannot surrender my opinion of the accuracy of a writer (without ample proof to the contrary), who, during a residence of seven years in a country, made its geological relations an express object of his study; comparing them also with those of analogous tracts in other parts of Germany, both by his own researches, and those of other naturalists. The opinion attributed by my opponent to Von Humboldt (an illustrious name, and carrying weight with it on any subject), will not, I apprehend, on due examination, be found at all discordant with the statements of Freiesleben. That of Dr. Boue, expressing that what is exclusively called rothetodtliegende by Mr. Conybeare, is not the old red sandstone of English geologists, will be readily acceded to, since the former constitutes in fact (with the exception of the weissliegende) the upper part of the carboniferous series of Freiesleben; but, let it be remembered, this is only one part of the question, and not inconsistent with the general view of that author, t The account given by D'Aubuisson also, though insufficient in several respects, is not incompatible with this view, by whom indeed the rothetodtliegende is expressly referred to the same formation as the terrain houiller, composing the principal part of its mass .J The language of Beudant likewise is of a similar import, who also expressly ascribes the rothliegende in question to the same series as the carboniferous, designating the latter by the general term of the red sandstone formation, and comparing it with that of Scotland as described by Prof. Jameson, Dr. Mac Culloch, and Dr. Boue. On this subject, Mr. Conybeare observes, "whetherit (namely, the rothetodtliegende exclusively so called by him) be more properly referable to the upper part of the carboniferous, or the lower part of the saliferous series, is a distinct question, on which much division of opinion exists, and which is after all not very material. I have endeavoured to compromise the matter by treating it as an intermediate link between them." I cannot subscribe to this doctrine. There can be no compromise upon a question of truth and error; nor can it surely be deemed immaterial to which series the rothliegende in dispute belongs, if we place a just value on a correct knowledge of the respective relations of the two series. My surprise is, that any division of opinion should exist after the detailed exposition of Freiesleben, which tended to reconcile all differences; and that greater weight should not have been attached to the judgment and descriptions of that author, the correctness of which upon other subjects has not hastily been called in question. But be this as it may, I am not aware that any German writer ever included any portion of the rothetodtliegende formation in the gypseous and saliferous series; while many, on the contrary, did comprehend the weissliegende in the carboniferous series. The former position, therefore, assumed by my antagonist, is in opposition to all German authority.
  A reference, however, to the Comparative View taken by that distinguished naturalist of the English and Continental floetz formations, will at once show that it is deficient in several important particulars.
  See e. g. the extract from that author's Travels in Hungary, inserted in the 14th number of the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, in particular, p. 269, and 273; and more generally, p. 267—273, which convey a clear account of the geological relations of the Saxon pitchstone, as well as of that of Italy (at Grantola on the Lago Maggiore). In both cases, the pitchstone is associated with porphyry, red sandstone, and conglomerate, the whole of which are referred to the carboniferous series.
The propagation of error is sometimes as rapid as simple. A judgment is pronounced by a name of celebrity; it is adopted and repeated by other names, perhaps of equal repute ; and thus that which was originally a mistake, becomes a rule established by authority. But on recurring to first principles, the error is discovered, and truth at length prevails.
  To conclude in the words of Lord Bacon, "the harmony of a science, supporting each part the other, is, and ought to be, the true and brief confutation and suppression of all the smaller sorts of objections."
  If there be any one series in geology more distinct than another, as constituting in itself a complete system, wholly independent of preceding and subsequent series, it is the carboniferous. It is true that in its lower line of boundary, where imposed upon transition tracts, we often hear graduations spoken of, as taking place from the one series into the other. These, however, can be so considered only in a mineralogical sense (particularly when the transition sandstone, one of the later members of that series, and the first floetz or old red sandstone come in contact): certainly not in a geological sense; for though, in the first place, the two series may in certain quarters be in a conformable position, yet if the line of apposition be examined throughout its extent, a general unconformability in the arrangement of their respective strata will be found to prevail, the carboniferous series being merely adapted to the form of the surface of the transition (or primary, as it may happen); and, in the second place, the transition series is commonly distinguished by a considerable variety of trilobites and other organic remains, while the first floetz or old red sandstone is free from such remains; and the only trilobite that I am acquainted with (beside the Oniscites Derbiensis of Martin) as occurring in the carboniferous limestone is a distinct species, and, I believe, also peculiar to that limestone.
The upper confines of the carboniferous series are also equally well marked. In England, the calcareous or new conglomerate (the first member of the gypseous and saliferous series) is, I apprehend, invariably found in an unconformably overlying position; in some quarters partially overspreading the surface of the coal fields, and extending thence in like manner to the carboniferous limestone, and even to the old red sandstone. The weissliegende or new conglomerate in Germany also, with its companion the cupriferous marl shale, is represented by Freiesleben as partially overspreading the carboniferous series, conforming to the figure of its surface, following its sinuosities, and surrounding the detached portions of that series that appear in isolated hills; being also in certain quarters in contact with transition tracts. Hence arises a variableness in the range and dip of the weissliegende, which are sometimes conformable, sometimes unconformable to the disposition of the subjacent members of the carboniferous series. That the weissleigende or new conglomerate is wholly distinct from that series is also proved; 1. By its several affinities to the cupriferous marl shale; and 2. By its being affected in common with that shale, and with the lower alpine limestone in general, and the zechstein in particular, by various disturbances, which do not extend to the carboniferous series beneath.
  I may here remark, that in one respect there is a marked difference between the composition of the calcareous or new conglomerate of England, and that of the weissliegende of Germany. In the former, rounded and angular fragments of limestone are very common, and frequently predominant; while in the latter they are of rare occurrence. Both conglomerates thus bear a close relation to the carboniferous series on which they respectively repose, and from whose detritus they were principally derived; the limestone frequently prevailing in the British carboniferous series, and being, comparatively speaking, only incidental in the German.
  It is the tuberculated species depicted in pi. 4, fig. 12, of Brongniart's valuable Histoire Naturelle des Trilobites, derived from the Dublin limestone. I found four specimens of the same trilobite in the Mendip limestone. Mr. Miller has observed it likewise in the limestone of Cork and Bristol. It has been met with also incidentally in the limestone of other parts of Great Britain.

