On the Classification of the older stratified Rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall, Sfc.
IN a former communication we described the mineral structure, and the order of superposition, of the successive groups of rocks which are crossed by a section from the north, to the south coast of Devonshire; and by following the beds (along their line of strike) into Cornwall, we were enabled, within certain limits, to bring the killas (or slate rocks of that county) into comparison with some of the lower Devonian groups. In this way, we ascertained the existence of a great culmiferous trough, superior to all the other groups in North Devon, and distinguished from them both by its physical structure and its organic remains. Hence we concluded, that the culmiferous series must be represented, for the future, in our geological maps by a distinct and appropriate colour. We had stated the same conclusion, and on precisely the same evidence, at the meeting of the British Association in 1836. We further concluded, that, at least, all the upper portion of this series was of the age of the great coal-formations of England; inasmuch as all its vegetable fossils, as far as they were ascertained, agreed specifically with undoubted coal plants. To this conclusion we still adhere ; and vve regard the culmiferous rocks as forming a true geological horizon, to which either the ascending or descending series of deposits may be referred.
   Again, in the arrangement of the several groups below the culm-trough, as they appear on the North Devon section, we have no modifications to suggest; and the very illustrations which were before suspended (1837), to explain the actual succession of the deposits, will serve our purpose at this moment.
   Since our first notice of this section in 1836, Mr. De la Beche has examined the country in great detail; and his arrangement of the several fossil- iferous groups, inferior to the lower culm beds, agrees with our own. The same may, we believe, be said generally of the arrangement given by Mr. Williams. We shall, therefore, for the future, refer to the successive groups in the North Devon section with entire confidence. The only questions which can now arise, must refer to their age and classification,—not to their relative position.
   To our four sections, illustrating the structure of South Devon, we make no material change or addition ; with one exception, however, viz. the interpolation of a small band of culm measures between the Ashburton limestone and the granite—discovered by Mr. Austen since our visit in 1836, and represented (PI. LI., fig. 8.) on his authority, as has indeed been already stated in a note to our former paper. Neither have we any material change to make in our comparison of the deposits of North and South Devon. Considered as a whole, we still think that they belong to one system of formation ; and that the lowest group of South Devon is lower than the lowest group of North Devon. But as for our comparison of the subordinate groups (though still the best that we can offer), we only throw it out as provisional, being chiefly founded on mineralogical characters, and those perhaps not of a very conclusive kind.
   Lastly, we have no change to make in our description of the fossiliferous groups of Cornwall. They are very nearly on a parallel with groups exhibited in the sections of North and South Devon ; and the fossiliferous slates of both counties belong to one system. We do not encumber ourselves with any details respecting the more crystalline and (as we believe) altered slates ; but we have, in our former paper, shown that they are not, merely on account of their structure, to be regarded as older than the calcareous and arenaceous deposits.
   After these preliminary remarks we proceed (agreeably to a promise given in our former paper) to re-examine the classification of the respective groups inferior to the culm measures ; and we begin by expressing our entire conviction that the true equivalents in the several disjointed sections can only be made out by zoological evidence.
   We were at first led to the opinion, that the series of deposits we are describing, were to be placed below the Silurian system, partly from the resemblance of the highest group (No. 5 of the North Devon section) to the Caradoc sandstone; and perhaps still more from the mineral structure and slaty cleavage of many parts of the lower groups. At that time we had not sufficient boldness to adopt the only other alternative, and throw all the old slates of Devon, and the (supposed) primary slates of Cornwall, into the epoch of the old red sandstone. We were aware, indeed, that several of the South Devon fossils conformed nearly, perhaps specifically, to the type of the carboniferous limestone. But on the other hand, no one was able to define the descending range of such organic forms; especially as it was asserted, that they reappeared in the south of Ireland, in beds alternating with true greywacke— or rocks supposed to be older than the old red sandstone. Hence we placed, provisionally, but with no satisfaction to ourselves, or confidence in our evidence, all the older fossil groups of Devon and Cornwall in that great but ill- defined interval that exists between the Caradoc sandstone and the older slates of North Wales. Since 1836 we have received repeated proofs of the insecurity of our first hypothesis. Thus, Mr. De la Beche (1837) exhibited fossil plants from the quarries of Marwood (PI. LI., sec. 2.) one of which Professor Lindley identified with Stigmaria ficoides, a very common coal- plant; and near the same place we had ourselves found a Bellerophon, not to be distinguished from B. lobatus of the old red sandstone. Again, Mr. Lonsdale, after an extensive examination of the fossils of South Devon, had pronounced them, more than a year since, to form a group intermediate between those of the Carboniferous and Silurian systems, and hence he concluded that the fossiliferous rocks of South Devon were subordinate to the old red sandstone. This view could be effectually maintained only by one who knew the fossils of the Silurian system. The work in which those fossils are described, proves that the fossils of the Silurian and carboniferous systems are quite distinct. It also proves that the fossils of the old red sandstone of Herefordshire are of a peculiar type; and, at the same time, it points out a want of zoological continuity in the development of organic forms between the epochs of the carboniferous and Silurian deposits. There is, indeed, a true zoological transition between the highest group of the Silurian system and the lower part of the old red sandstone; but between the middle and upper groups of the old red sandstone and any part of the carboniferous limestone no such transition had been discovered. These facts were well known to Mr. Lonsdale, and hence his conclusion respecting the age of the South Devon limestone was based on incomparably better evidence than the mere specific resemblance of some of its fossils to those of the carboniferous limestone: for he contended, as above stated, that the organic remains of South Devon formed a connecting link between the carboniferous and Silurian fossils; and thus supplied that zoological continuity which before had been sought for, but never found.
But this is not the whole of the evidence by which we were gradually led to distrust the views, we had first entertained respecting the age of the older stratified groups above described. For one of the authors, during the summer of 1838, re-examined a part of the great transverse section of Devonshire, and was more than ever convinced that, with some ambiguous exceptions, there was on each side of the great trough a true passage from the lower division of the culm-measures into the inferior fossiliferous group. Thus the section from Marwood across the culm series to the calcareous slates of South Petherwin seemed to be perfectly symmetrical (PI. LI. fig. 2.), the lower beds of the culm-measures being repeated (as described in our previous paper) on both sides of the trough ; from beneath which emerge on the respective sides, and in a regular uninterrupted sequence, the calcareous slates of Petherwin and Barnstaple. Now, if this view be correct, it follows, almost inevitably, from our own evidence, that the calcareous slates in question must be very near the upper limit of the old red sandstone; and this conclusion being once admitted, we should have little difficulty in classing, not merely the calcareous rocks of North Devon, but also the fossiliferous slates of South Devon and Cornwall, with the old red sandstone.
  To the preceding facts, bearing on the classification of the older rocks of Devon and Cornwall, we might add some remarks on the mineral structure of the two counties—on the existence of red conglomerates among the beds of the Cornish killas—and on the large tracts, both of North and South Devon, filled with rocks identical in structure with the most ordinary forms of old red sandstone. But we forbear to dwell on such facts as these, wishing to build our present conclusions chiefly on zoological evidence.
  Guided then by the evidence already stated, and the conclusions to which it seemed to point, we have re-examined the fossils obtained, either by oui own labours or by the assistance of our friends, from the two counties ; and the conclusion arrived at by Mr. Lonsdale respecting the age of the South Devon limestone, we now apply without reserve both to the five groups of our North Devon section, and to the fossiliferous slates of Cornwall.
  This is undoubtedly the greatest change which has ever been attempted at one time, in the classification of British rocks. But all the facts brought to light by those, who have laboured in the same field with ourselves, were gradually leading towards the same point; and the establishment of the Silurian organic types must before long have made the change inevitable.
  So far from thinking ourselves rash and hasty in drawing the preceding conclusion, we think we may rather be accused of being over-cautious and tardy in accepting evidence, however opposed to commonly received opinions. But, on this score, we may state in our justification, that a considerable part of our fossil evidence has been but recently brought to light. Several of the organic remains, from the neighbourhood of New Quay, on the north coast of Cornwall, which we owe to the kindness of Mr. Carlyon, and many other good specimens given to us by our friend Mr. Pattison of Launceston, have been but very recently submitted to a careful examination; and the beautiful collection of Plymouth fossils committed to our care by Mr. Hennah, was only unpacked, in consequence of unavoidable delays, during the present spring. An examination of this collection by one of the authors, assisted by Mr. Lonsdale, Professor Phillips, and Mr. James Sowerby, confirmed the previous conclusions of Mr. Lonsdale, which were chiefly founded on Mr. Austen’s collection; and, as before stated, led the way to our proposed classification of the Cornish and Devonian formations.
  At first, we did not intend to give any map among the illustrations of this paper; as it was thought that any of the published geological maps of England would enable the reader to follow our details. But it has now been thought better to give a reduced map of the country we describe, chiefly taken from the corrected Index geological map attached to Mr. De la Beche’s Report on the Geology of Cornwall and Devon; in order that we may convey, at a single glance, the connexion between the structure of Devonshire and Cornwall, and the directions in which our several sections are drawn f. All details of structure are, however, intentionally avoided, and the stratified groups are all represented by two colours. In this way we mean to convey our belief, that the inferior groups all belong to one system, viz. that of the old red sandstone. There may, indeed, among the lowest rocks of the two counties, be some which belong to a still lower system. But if such there he, we are unable to point them out; and we think it best and safest, as far as regards their classification, to merge them all at present in one common colour.
  Neither did we at first intend to publish any figures of the fossils derived from the several groups above described. But it was urged, that a paper proposing such great changes in the classification of our older rocks would not be well received, or even understood, without more graphic proofs than mere verbal descriptions. In the subjoined plates (PI. LII. to LVIII.) we have therefore figured some of our best fossils. The figures and determination of the fossil shells are all by Mr. James Sowerby: any notice we may take of the corals will be given on the authority of Mr. Lonsdale.
   We might perhaps now content ourselves by simply giving a list of the fossils derived from the respective deposits, and then leave the reader to draw the proper conclusion from the facts before him ; but we think it advisable, in the first place, to put our evidence in a more general and popular form. In our previous paper, the successive groups are described in the ascending- order in which we first observed them, during our traverse from the north to the south coast of Devon. But in noticing the fossils, it is almost necessary (as our sections have no well-defined base) to take a reversed order, and commence with the upper division of the culm-measures.
   1, Culm Measures.—In the first place, then, we have nothing to add to the evidence given by the vegetable fossils of this upper division of the culm- measures, or to the conclusions we drew from it. On this point, therefore, we merely refer to our former communication (supra, p. 669, et seq.). The black limestone of the lower division contains many shells of the genus Posidonia, three or four species of Goniatites, and two or three other genera not yet well ascertained. Now the genus Posidonia is found abundantly both in the upper and lower limestone shales, of the true carboniferous series of England and Ireland : for example, in the calp of Ireland, which is in the place of the lower shales, and in the upper limestone shales of Northumberland, not far below the millstone grit. There is a species in Northumberland, which makes a very near approach to a species very abundant in the black culm limestone. Again, of the Goniatites of the culm limestone, there are three species very closely related to those of the mountain limestone. Among them is one which Professor Phillips is unable to separate from the G. Henslowi, found in the great scar limestone of the Isle of Man ; and it deserves remark that this species occurs also in the Petherwin group, below the culm-measures,—a fact which tends to prove the reality of a passage from the base of culm-measures into the next inferior group.
   Where then shall we place the culm limestone, and carbonaceous shales that form a part of it ? If we arrange them with the upper shales of the mountain limestone, then nearly the whole culm-trough of Cornwall and Devon will be the equivalent of the middle and upper divisions of our true carboniferous series. This view was adopted by Prof. Phillips when he published his index map of the British Isles. But if we identify the black, calcareous, culm shales with the calp of Ireland, or the lower limestone shales of England, the culm series of Devon will, as a whole, be very nearly the equivalent of our entire carboniferous series. Considering, however, the enormous thickness of the whole culm-measures and the paucity of fossils in all the inferior beds of its lower division, we continue to place its base in a doubtful position. This is a measure of necessary caution, especially when we bear in mind the extreme difficulty, in the northern parts of our island, of drawing any precise line of demarcation between the base of the coal-measures and the old red sandstone.
  Before the sections of North Devon had been made out, the culm-measures were naturally included in the vast deposit of graywacke, of which we knew neither the beginning nor the end. But to merge them in that series now, is to reject all the direct evidence we possess, and all the analogies supplied by the corresponding parts of our island. Lastly, there seems now to be no difference of opinion as to the superficial distribution of the culm-measures; for the boundary line indicated roughly by us in 1836, and more in detail in our previous paper, agrees, as far as it goes, with that lately published by Mr. De la Beche.
  2. Fossils of Petherwin and Barnstaple.—The fossiliferous slates in the neighbourhood of these two places rise immediately from beneath the base of the culm-measures. Their position is therefore symmetrical, and, as before stated, they appear on the whole to form a mineral passage into the overlying system. In this way, we establish a mineralogical connexion between the North Devon and Cornish sections. But the connexion is made incomparably more secure by help of the fossils. Those we have obtained from Barnstaple, Croyde Bay, Marwood, &c. (all of them places in the highest division, No. 5, of our North Devon section,) certainly agree as a group with those of Petherwin, and have many species in common, as will appear by our lists. It is enough for our present purpose to quote the following; Spirifer attenuatus, S. bisulcatus, Or this inter lineata, Atrypa concentrica, A. decussata, A. striatula ; also a smooth and a plaited species ; Lepfana caperata, L. scabricula ? Pecten s. n. Pallastra s.n. All these shells are found both among the calcareous slates of Pethervvin and in the calcareous slates near Barnstaple; and several of the species common to both localities are extremely abundant. That there are several species among the Pethervvin fossils which have not been yet found among those of Barnstaple, takes not at all from the force of our direct evidence. It deserves remark, that there are several species in these upper groups which do not appear in the lower; and among those we may notice the Goniatites and the Endosiphonitesf, (Clymenia of Munster,) as they seem to point towards the types of the carboniferous period.
  In the lower division of the Barnstaple calcareous slates occur the Marwood fossils, given in our lists, among which are several species of Cuculleea. These shells are associated with the genus Bellerophon, one of which, as before stated, cannot be distinguished from the Bellerophon globatus of the old red sandstone. Very nearly on the strike of the Marwood beds occur the fossil plants of the Sloly quarries. According to Professor Lindley, (ante, p. 683.) one of the species belongs either to a Stigmaria or a Lepidodendron ; while others are new or incapable of determination. Professor Henslow, who has recently examined a good series of fossil plants from the same locality, informs us, that he is able out of them to distinguish three or four species, not one of which he believes to have been described in the published works of Sternberg, Brogniart, or Lindley. Either of these results would fall in with our present views. We undoubtedly consider the Sloly beds as out of the limits of the carboniferous series, and therefore we should expect that its fossils would conform to an older type. On the other hand, the appearance of a few species of the true carboniferous fossils in the upper division of the old red sandstone would be in perfect harmony with what we know of the geological distribution of organic forms. But the assumption that the ordinary species of coal-measure plants may exist in the old graywacke rocks of an entirely distinct period, takes for granted conditions which are not supported by the evidence of the Devonian sections, as we now interpret them.
  We are unwilling to push our present remarks any further; but we can hardly avoid surmising; that the peculiar plants of the “ terrain d’anthracite inferieur” of Professor Voltz, and those of a supposed similar age in Brittany and other parts of France, may eventually be found to be on the same parallel with this portion of our North Devon series.
   3. Inferior Groups of the North Devon Section.—The number of fossils hitherto collected is far too small to justify us in affirming to what extent the fossils of the Ilfracombe calcareous slates (North Devon Section, No. 3.) differ from those of Barnstaple. A few species are certainly common to both, among which we may quote two species of Leptcena and a Pecten (see the list). Corals abound in the Ilfracombe slates, though the species are not numerous. The Favosites polymorpha (never yet discovered in the mountain limestone, or below the upper Silurian groups,) is the most abundant. With it is another entirely new species, which also abounds in the Cornish fossiliferous strata beneath the culm-measures. On the whole we may state, on the authority of Mr. Lonsdale (from whom alone we have derived any accurate information on this head), that the Devonian corals are all either of species peculiar to these groups or such as occur only in the higher part of the Silurian system.
   Immediately below the Ilfracombe calcareous slates, are some hard strong- beds, with numerous impressions of a large cordiform bivalve, unlike anything we remarked in the overlying beds. From the lowest group of all (North Devon Section, No. 1.) we have very few well-preserved fossils : among them are many beautiful casts of a Fenestella, and among the bivalves is an Orthis of a new species, and a Spirifer identical with one found near Barnstaple {Spi- rifer attenuatus P).
   Such is the summary of the evidence given by the fossils of the North Devon section ; and imperfect as we acknowledge it to be, we think it sufficient to bear out our proposed classification ; especially as we know of no conflicting- fossil evidence that is in any way opposed to it.
   3. South Devon and Cornwall.—In the comparison of the mineralogical groups of North and South Devon, we can add nothing to what has been stated in a former paper. We could not bring the great upper South Devon limestone into direct comparison with the calcareous zone of Barnstaple; because, in that case, the great slate formation, which overlies the Plymouth limestone, would have no representative in North Devon We therefore provisionally placed the great calcareous group of South Devon on a parallel with the lower fossiliferous groups toward the northern extremity of our section. The fossils appear on the whole to bear out this classification.
   First, then, as to the South Devon corals.—None of them have been found in the mountain limestone, several are new or not known to occur in the Silurian system, and some agree specifically with corals of the highest Silurian groups. On this point we rely on Mr. Lonsdale’s determination; and we give it in his own words.
   Coupling this account with the near resemblance of some of the South Devon shells to known fossils of the mountain limestone, we at once establish our main position, that the South Devon fossils are of an intermediate type between those of the Silurian and carboniferous systems. It also follows from the same evidence, that the North and South Devon corals belonar to rocks which are very nearly on the same parallel, as the most abundant corals of the lower North Devon groups agree specifically with the most abundant corals of the Plymouth and Tor Bay limestones.
   As far as regards the fossil shells, we must refer to the accompanying lists. We may however remark, in our present summary, that we have shells in the Plymouth limestone which make a near approach to Terebratula Wilsoni, Alrypa orbicularis, Orthis depressa, Pileopsis vetustatis, Nerita Haliotis, and Orthoceratites circularis, of the upper Silurian rocks. Most of them, however, when closely examined, present some points, we think, of specific difference. On the other hand, this limestone contains some genera and species very nearly resembling certain fossils (such as Pecten dissimilis (Phillips), P. plicatus (Sowerby), P. arenosus (Phillips), Terebratula acuminata (Sowerby), Producta analoga (Phillips), &c. &c.) of the carboniferous limestone. Lastly, we may remark, that many species in the Plymouth limestone (and those, we believe, the most abundant) are quite distinct from the fossils both of the carboniferous and Silurian systems ; among which we may point out a very large Atrypa, Buccinum spinosum, a large Natica, and several small univalves. (See the Lists.)
   We have many fossils from the neighbourhood of Newton Bushel, chiefly, however, in the form of siliceous casts: we forbear, however, to dwell on them, as Professor Phillips and Mr. Austen are, we believe, both engaged in their description. Some of them agree specifically with shells of the Plymouth limestone; others are new; several of them nearly approach the forms * of the mountain limestone (as we learn from the description of Mr. Austen, and the recently published " Report” of Mr. De la Beche); and the corals, at least the most abundant species, agree with corals of the Plymouth and Ilfracombe limestones.
   Such is a brief summary of the results arising out of an examination of the South Devon fossils ; and the conclusion to which they point appears to us absolutely inevitable, viz. that the South Devon series is intermediate between the carboniferous and Silurian systems, and consequently on the parallel of the old red sandstone.
   After the details of our previous communication, it is evident that all the calcareous slates on the south-eastern side of Cornwall are of the age of the owest group of the South Devon section, and therefore probably in the lower portion of the old red sandstone. On the north-western coast of the county, we were preceded by Mr. De la Beche, and we must refer our readers to the many excellent details of his Report.” A few of our fossils from both coasts will appear in the appended lists; and, imperfect as they are, they appear to sanction our general views. The Petherwin, and we think also the highly crystalline Tintagel slates, appear to be of the age of the Barnstaple slates, and are therefore in the upper part of the old red sandstone. Such is a general summary of the evidence on which our proposed classification is founded; and the result is given in our accompanying map. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS, &C.
   Having stated the grounds on which we have endeavoured to establish the classification of the stratified rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall, it may be well, before we quit the subject, to notice certain objections that have been urged against our views.
   1. In the first place, our evidence may be considered defective, from the absence of the carboniferous limestone, which in many parts of the British Isles has so striking a position between the coal measures and the old red sandstone. To this we might reply, by pointing out several instances in the central counties of England, where the carboniferous system rests on the lower formations, without the intervention of any bands of limestone. We would, however, rather appeal to a more general fact—that the mountain limestone, after forming in the north of England a great succession of beds, and rising into mountains of considerable elevation, gradually thins out in its prolongation towards the south ; so that in South Wales it occupies but one.well- defined band, and at length so entirely dies away in the western extremity of Pembrokeshire, that the overlying culm measures and hard grits rest, in one district, immediately on older rocks, without the intervention of any calcareous matter whatsoever. With such a fact before us, we have no reason to be surprised at the absence of the mountain limestone, where the culm measures reappear in Devonshire and Cornwall.
   Considering the enormous thickness of the culm measures of these counties, it is by no means improbable that the mountain limestone is there represented by contemporaneous deposits of a different mineral type. For surely it is now needless for us to prove that rocks, identical in geological position, may entirely change their lithological structure, as they pass from one county to another. A change of structure, however, implies a change of conditions during the time of the deposit; and such a change might greatly modify the forms of animal life. In this way we might, perhaps, explain the absence of many of the best-known mountain-limestone fossils from the carbonaceous shales and sandstones of the lower culm measures of Devonshire.
   2. Again, it has been objected, that the fossils of the Devonian groups, now classed with the old red sandstone, are not the same with the known fossils of that formation.
   We allow that the fossil fish of the old red sandstone have not yet been discovered among the Devonian rocks. But how can we build any conclusion on such a mere negative fact? The same genera and species are not distributed through the whole extent of every formation. Moreover, who can tell that fossil fish will not hereafter be discovered among the calcareous slates of Devonshire ? But there is a more positive objection to be noticed, viz. that the known fossil shells of the old red sandstone differ greatly from those we have obtained from the Devonian groups. To this we may reply, that the shells hitherto described from the old red sandstone are derived exclusively from its very lowest beds, which probably do not appear on any of our previous sections. These objections are, however, of little weight against the broad fact (which, in truth, forms the sum and substance of our evidence), that the fossils described in this paper are of a type intermediate between the types of the carboniferous and Silurian systems.
   3. The extreme change, among the formations we have described, of the ordinary mineral type, is another objection to our views. It has been noticed in various parts of our two memoirs, and considered at some length in our paper, of April last, in the Philosophical Magazine; we need not, therefore, dwell upon it now. But we may briefly state, that as the old red sandstone exhibits so many changes of structure, in its range from the Orkneys to the north side of the Bristol Channel, we have no difficulty in admitting still further changes, if supported by the evidence of fact or rational analogy. What difficulty is there in believing that a marine formation should, in one part of the world, have gone forward so tranquilly as to allow all the ordinary operations of animal life ; while, in another part, the deposits of the ocean were interrupted or modified by rude mechanical movements, incompatible with the existence of organized beings? We see no difficulty whatsoever in the mineral structure of what we now regard as the old red sandstone of Devonshire and Cornwall. The classification we adopt is derived from its own appropriate evidence; and it at the same time removes the greatest difficulties presented by the unexplained phenomena of our older formations; gives a natural sequence and meaning to their history; and, we may add, gives a symmetry to the disposition of the colours on our geological maps, which they never had before.	,
  The strongest proofs are given in this and our previous paper, of the insufficiency of mineral character, taken alone, to determine the epoch of any doubtful formation : and as the term gray-wacke has done much disservice to geology, by inducing observers to merge, under one unmeaning name, deposits belonging to distinct periods in the history of the earth, we venture to hope that the word may henceforth be discarded as a term of classification. Used for the mere purpose of mineral description, we can of course make no similar objections to it.
  4. Lastly, we may remark, that in all the descriptions, both of this and our previous paper, we have, for obvious reasons, drawn our analogies from the nearest formations of our own island. But we cannot forbear expressing our belief, that the series of rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall, above described, may serve to clear up some of the difficulties in the classification of the older formations of the continent of Europe, where the old red sandstone has seldom been found, at least in what has been hitherto regarded as the ordinary British type. But now that the old red sandstone has been exhibited in such a different form, on such a vast scale, and with its own series of organic remains, we have little doubt that its true equivalents will be found distributed through various parts of Europe. To obtain, as far as possible, satisfaction on some of these points, is the first task we propose to ourselves during the investigations of the approaching summer.
  Though the term old red sandstone, when designating great groups of rocks like the Cornish killas and Devonian slates, should involve no error of classification, still it would, mineralogically, be most inappropriate. We purpose therefore, for the future, to designate these groups collectively by the name Devonian system, as involving no hypothesis, and being agreeable to analogy. Thus the terms Carboniferous system, Devonian system, Silurian system, and Cambrian system, will represent a vast and apparently uninterrupted sequence of deposits; each having, as a whole, zoological and (often also) mineralogical characters of its own, yet each passing into the system next in order by almost imperceptible shades of difference. The old paleozoic rocks appear, therefore, notwithstanding their enormous scale, and the wide diffusion of the same organic types, to have been formed in subordination to the same laws which, in after periods, produced the more clear succession of our secondary formations.

