THE name of WERNER is so celebrated, and his reputation so well established, in every country in which the public attention has been directed to so interesting a study as that of the Natural History of Fossils—that to present a translation of his ingenious Treatise on the External Characters of Fossils, might seem sufficient to ensure to it a favourable reception.
Mr. Werner published his work in the year 1774. Since that time a period has elapsed in which rapid strides have been made in every branch of Mineralogy; and, as it might be expected, considerable improvements have taken place in the Treatise on the External Characters of Fossils. Aware of such, the lovers of Mineralogy in Germany have frequently called on Mr. Werner for 'a new edition of his work. His numerous avocations have hitherto prevented a compliance with the wishes of the public; and the period of its appearance perhaps still remote these circumstances, the Translator, desirous of completing the integrity of the work, has had recourse to other sources to supply the deficiencies of the  printed original. These are principally copies of Mr. Werner’s manuscript corrections additions as circulated among his pupils, notes taken during his lectures in 1791—1792, and  the Mineralogies of his disciples Wiedenmann and Emmerling; and to illustrate the extraneous forms of fossils, the, Manual of Natural History of Professor Blumenbach; has been consulted.
In the denominations given to the Characters and to the Fossils, employed illustration of them, the Translator has commonly followed Mr. Kirwan; to whose Valuable labours Mineralogy in general is so much indebted.
The Characters are tabularly arranged in the system with the corresponding German, presenting a connected view of their relations to each other; and of the Fossils an alphabetical index is added, accompanied by their German synonims, and with references to the several sections in which they are employed as illustrative examples of the External Characters.
In order to elucidate the subject of crystallizations, two Plates of crystalline forms are added, and explanations of the figures annexed,
In fine, the Translator hopes that the Treatise on the External Characters of Fossils now appears in a more entire form than has hitherto been made Public.

