The fossil bodies represented in plates viii. and ix. of the Supplementary Illustrations, were found between Euston Square and Kilburn, in the excavations for the London and Birmingham Kailroad. They occurred at depths varying from twelve to forty feet; London clay being exposed at this place within a few feet of the vegetable mould. When I first examined these fossils, they appeared so very different from any I had previously seen, that I determined to lose no time in obtaining as good a series of them as possible. There exists among several of my geological friends a difference of 
opinion as to their real nature ; some having regarded them as Spongites, while others have supposed them to be of vegetable origin. For my own part I am quite doubtful to what class they belong, and therefore prefer leaving the question open to further investigation, before proposing any generic name. The two copper plates which accompany this notice have been engraved by Mr. J. De C. Sowerby, and I cannot help observing that he has delineated the figures very accurately. I will now proceed to give some account of a few of the specimens, but I must first state that I employ botanical terms, with the view of making my descriptions more clearly understood. 

One of the specimens (plate ix. fig. 1) is leaf-shaped, flattened, and curved to one side ; width four inches and three quarters, length uncertain, owing to the upper part having been broken off; thickness half an inch. The whole of the anterior and posterior surfaces is studded with a profusion of small bodies, for the most part of an oval form, and a few of them have a furrow down the middle. In one part these bodies are nearly cylindrical, and so regularly placed in relation to each other, that they appear like the lateral arms of a Pentacrinite. 

Fig. 1 a. — Oviform bodies magnified, some of them showing the longitudinal furrow. 

Fig. 2. — A fine portion of a large stem dividing into four branches, arising from which may be distinctly seen several smaller ones, diverging in different directions. Like fig. 1 this specimen is covered with the small oviform bodies. 

Fig. 3 is also a fragment of a stem, with the bases of two branches, the upper one of the size of a goose quill, the lower one much smaller. Besides having the same kind of oviform bodies on its surface, as are noticed in the descriptions of the two preceding figures, several raised and slightly curved lines pass perpendicularly along the stem and divide at intervals, giving a scabrous appearance to that portion of the surface where they occur. 

Fig. 4 is a round stem, two inches long and nearly half an inch in diameter. On this specimen are seen the rudiments of several branches, and in some parts furrows or depressions, along which the branches appear to have passed after being given off. 

Plate viii. fig. 1. — This extraordinary and beautiful fragment is in a fine state of preservation. It is quadrangular, nearly straight, and embossed with a number of anastomosing branches, curiously built up of small oviform bodies.— How much farther this fossil extended it is impossible to say, as the broken ends are of the same diameter as the middle. 

Fig. 1 a. — A portion of the above magnified. 

Fig. 2 represents a fragment with similar branches to those of the specimen in fig. 1, ramifying on a thin partly cylindrical portion of the fossil. 

Fig. 3. — In the centre of this figure is a slender round stem divided into two branches, which soon expand and become flattened ; the terminations have been both broken off. At the upper part is seen a transverse section, showing the internal structure of another portion. It is uncertain whether all these parts belong to one and the same fossil. 

Fig. 4. — This specimen is of an oval shape, tapering at its lower part into a kind of leaf-stalk. From its upper part on the left side two branches are given off, and at the top is the rudiment of a third. From the hardness of the matrix the centre is not well shown. 

Fig. 5. — This fossil is curved backwards and to one side, having a broad sulcus along the centre, which is partly filled with hardened matrix. The inferior termination is rounded, and inclines rather forward. The surface is covered with small oviform bodies. 

Fig. 6. — Nearly flat, edges rounded, and slightly raised. — On the upper part of the fossil is a projection on each side ; from these projections the edges above and below slant inwards. At the upper termination is a small notch, the lower one is imperfect. 

Fig. 7. — Oval, length one inch, breadth three quarters of an inch. The centre of this fossil is shaped like a fan, owing to a depression on each side. 

Fig. 8. — Oval, nearly flat, the surface thickly covered with small oviform bodies. The base of this and the two preceding specimens presents a rough appearance, as if it had been attached to a branch or stem. 

Fig. 9. — Leaf-shaped, flattish, edges rounded, upper end rough, length two inches and a quarter, breadth nearly one inch. Dividing at the basis into two flat processes, the upper one crossing obliquely over the under. 

Fig. 10. — This singular fossil is remarkably thin. It expands very much at its upper part, which is curved downward and to one side. On its surface are a number of small ribs, passing parallel to each other but at unequal distances, curving with the fossil, and meeting nearly together at the top. From 
the lower part on the right side a small branch is given off. 

Fig. 11. — A flattened stem dividing about midway into two or more compressed branches. 

Fig. 12. — View of a polished transverse section, showing the internal structure. 

Fig. 12 a. — Magnified view of a portion of the above. 

Fig. 13. — View of a polished longitudinal section of a leaf-shaped fossil, showing its internal structure. 

Fig. 14. — View of a polished transverse section. On examining the centre of this specimen, a magnified view of which is given at fig. 14 a, it appears as if a group of the same kind 
of oviform bodies had been cut through, which, in the descriptions of many of the preceding figures, have so frequently been noticed as occurring on the outer surface. This group is surrounded with curved lines, similar to those represented in the section of fig. 12. 

Fig. 15— Round, about the size of a goose-quill, and curved spirally, terminating at its lower part in four or five small rounded processes. The upper end has a rough surface, as if it had been broken. 

This specimen was found near Kilburn, by my friend H. B. Burford, Esq., of Lisson Grove. 

At page 17, vol. ii. of the 4 Proceedings of the Geological Society,' is a notice of a paper by Mr. Richardson, on the coast-section from Whitstable to the North Foreland. The sketch of this paper which is given in the Proceedings concludes as follows. — "A minute description is given of the 
Septaria which are said to be very numerous, and to have the surface often covered with small ramifications, resembling branches flattened by pressure." 

In this sketch no mention is made of anastomosing branches, nor is anything said of the small oviform bodies which have been so constantly met with in my specimens. Again, the branches which I have found do not merely ramify on the surface, but also in many instances pervade every part of the interior of the stone. Still I cannot help thinking, from their being described as resembling branches flattened by pressure," that they will on comparison be found allied to them ; and if so, another locality, many miles distant from mine, must be added. 


It will be observed that some of the fossils are almost black. This has arisen from the use of diluted muriatic acid when I first began to clean them, which acted powerfully on the fossil as well as the matrix. It is, however, necessary to notice that in many instances the fossil itself is of a dark colour. 

I trust that when the nature of these remains is more fully made out, additional light will be thrown on some of those singular forms of the flint which are often discovered in the chalk formation, and the origin of many of which still remains in obscurity. From several specimens of flint which I have 
examined, I am of opinion that these curious fossils do actually occur in this formation ; and it appears the more probable, from the fact that several of the same genera, 1 and at least one species of shell {Terebratula strlatula), are found in both strata. 

