"GENTLEMEN,—In attempting a sketch of the subjects which have occupied the attention of the Society during the year, 1 should wish to retain that distribution of the science of geology according to which I arranged my remarks in the Address which I had last year the honour of reading to the Society; I mean the primary division into Descriptive Geology and Geological Dynamics; the former implying a description of the rocks of the earth's surface according to an established classification of strata and formations; and the latter dealing with the study of those general laws and causes of change by which we hope to understand and account for the facts which Descriptive Geology brings before us;—in short, the present condition and the past history of the earth's crust. But as the laws of permanence and change, with regard to organized beings, differ very widely from the dynamics of brute matter, we may conveniently make a separate study of the relations of organic life to which geology conducts us, and may mark it by the name Palceontology, by which it is commonly known. I will add that it still appears to me convenient, for the present, to divide Descriptive Geology into two portions,—the Home circuit, in which the order of superposition has already been established with great continuity and detail; and the Foreign region, in which we are only just beginning to trace such an order. I shall also, as before, take the ascending order of strata. According to this arrangement of the science, I shall venture to bring to your recollection a few of the points to which our attention has mainly been called during the past year.
Descriptive Geology. 
  1. Home (North European) Geology.—When I stated that Descriptive Geology lias for its task the reference of the rocks of some portion of the earth's surface to an established classification into strata and formations, it was implied, that the more common employment of the descriptive geologist must be to refer the rocks which he examines to some classes already fixed and recognised; but it could hardly fail to occur to you, that from time to time the leaders in this study will be called upon to execute a more weighty and elevated office, in framing the classifications which other observers are to apply; in drawing the great lines of division and subdivision which fix the form of the subject; in setting up llic tvpc with which examples are to be compared; in constructing the language in which others are to narrate their facts. Steps of this kind have formed, and must form, the great epochs in the progress of all science of classification, and especially in ours; and I need not remind jou how great the importance and the influence of such steps amongst von have been. To pronounce at once upon the success of such steps must always be in some degree hazardous; since their success is in fact this, that they influence permanently and powerfully the researches, descriptions, and speculations of future writers; and there are few of us ulio can pretend to the foresight which might enable us to say, in any special case, liow far this will be so. Yet the great works of Messrs Murchison and Sedgwick, tending to the establishment of a classification of the strata below the old red sandstone (works which, on all accounts j we must consider as a joint undertaking), appear already to offer an augury which can hardly be doubtful, of this influence and permanence. Mr Murchison's appellation of the "Silurian System" has already been adopted by MM. Elie de Beaumont and Dufresnoy, who have given it currency on the Continent: M. Boue and M. de Verneuil announce the diffusion of " Silurian" rocks in Servia and the adjacent parts of Turkey in Europe; our own members, Mr Hamilton and Mr Strickland, have extended their range to the. Thracian Bosphorus; M. Forchhammer of Copenhagen, visited the "Silurian region" to recognise the rocks of Scandinavia; and MM. Omalius D'Halloy and Dumont have just explored it, to establish a parallel between its deposits and those of Belgium. It will be observed that some of the districts thus mentioned are out of the limits of our geological Home circuit; and if the identification be really and permanently established in these cases, will extend the limits within which the parallelism of geological series can be asserted: and this is, in effect, what we have a right to look for, sooner or later, in the progress of geological science. As we must be careful not to apply our domestic types without modification to other regions, so must we take care not to despair of modifying our scheme, so that it shall be far more extensively applicable than it at first appeared to be. Of this progress of things, examples are too obvious and too recent to require to be pointed out.
The labours of Professor Sedgwick refer to the "Cambrian System" which lies beneath the Silurian system, occupying much of North Wales, Cumberland, and a great part of Scotland; while the Silurian system spreads over a great part of South Wales and the adjoining English counties. The classification of the rocks of this portion of our island to which Professor Sedgwick has been led, though laid before you only at a recent meeting, is the fruit of the vigorous and obstinate struggles of many years, to mould into system a portion of geology which appeared almost too refractory for the philosopher's hands; and which Professor Sedgwick grappled with the more resolutely, in proportion as others shrank away from the task perplexed and wearied. I need not attempt any detailed view of his system: his First Class of Primary Stratified Rocks occupies the Highlands of Scotland and the Hebrides, and appears in Anglesea and Caernarvonshire; the crystalline slates of Skiddaw Forest, and the Upper Skiddaw slate-series come next. Above these is his Second Class, or Cambrian and Silurian System. The Cambrian is divided into Lower and Upper Cambrian, of which the former includes all the Welsh series under the Bala limestone; the two great groups of green roofing slate and porphyry on the north and south sides of the mineral axis of the Cumbrian Mountains (of which groups the position had previously been misunderstood), and parts of Cornwall and South Devon. The Upper Cambrian system contains a large part of the Lammermuir chain; a part of the Cumbrian Hills, commencing with the calcareous slates of Coniston and Windermere; the system of the Berwyns and South Wales; all the North Devon, and a part of the South Devon and Cornish series. Ascending thus through a scries of formations distinguished and reduced to order by the indefatigable exertions and wide views of Professor Sedgwick, we arrive at the Silurian system: and here we must seek our subdivisions from the rich results of the labours of Mr Murchison. These subdivisions were published in the summer of 1833. Like the Cambrian, the Silurian is divided into a Lower and an Upper system, the former including the Llandeilo flags and the Caradoc sandstones; the Upper Silurian rocks being the Wenlock shale and limestone, the Lower Ludlow, the Aymestry limestone, and the Upper Ludlow, which finally conducts us to the tilestones or bottom-beds of the old red sandstone.
That these various series of Cambrian and Silurian rocks arc really superposed on one another; that they are justly separated into these groups; and that the smaller groups are truly of a subordinate nature, divided bylines less broad than those which bound the great series of formations ;— these are points, of which the evidence must be sought in the works to which I refer. The evidence adduced by Professor Sedgwick is mainly to be found in the great fact of superposition, supported by the circumstances of dip, strike, cleavage, mineral character, and all the great incidents of mountain-masses. To proofs of this kind Mr Murchison is able to add the testimony of organic fossils, of which a vast and most instructive collection is figured in his work. These fossils of the Silurian system, amounting in all to about 350 species, are essentially distinct from those of the Carboniferous System and Old Red Sandstone. This being so, the establishment of these great divisions is supported by that geological evidence which properly belongs to the subject.
  "In detecting order and system among the monuments of the most obscure and remote periods of the earth's history, it may easily be supposed that it has been necessary to employ and to improve all the best methods of geological investigation. Prof. Sedgwick's classification of the oldest rocks which form the surface of this island has of course been obtained by a careful attention to the position and superposition of the mineral masses, and by tracing the geographical continuity of the strata, almost mile by mile, from Cape Wrath to the Land's End. In this manner he has connected the rocks of Scotland with those of Cumberland; these again with those of Wales; and the Welsh series, though more obscurely, with that of Devonshire and Cornwall. In this survey he has constantly kept before his eyes a distinction, known indeed before, but never before so carefully and systematically employed, between the slaty cleavage of rocks and their stratification; for the directions of these two planes, though each wonderfully persistent over large tracts, never, except by accident, coincide. He has taken for his main guide the direction of the strata, or, as it is called, the strike of the beds; and in such a course, the theory of Elic de Beaumont respecting the parallelism of contemporaneous elevations, whether true or false, could not fail to give an additional interest to geological researches, conducted on so large a scale as those of Prof. Sedgwick. Mr Murchison's mode of investigation may be described thus: that he has applied, for the first time, to the rocks below the old red sandstone, the method of classification previously employed with so much success for the oolites. It is truly remarkable, that Nature has placed in this our corner of the world, series, probably the most complete which exist, of both these groups of strata; and as the oolites of England have long been the type of that portion of European geology, the Silurians of Wales may perhaps soon be recognised as the standard members of a still more extensive range of deposits. As if Nature wished to imitate our geological maps, she has placed in the corner of Europe our island, containing an Index Seriet of European formations in full detail.
  "The Carboniferous, Old Bed, Silurian, and Cambrian systems have, by many writers, up to the present time, been all comprehended in the term "transition rocks," so far as that term has been used with any definite application at all. The analysis of this vague group into these distinct portions, removes the confusion and perplexity which have hitherto prevailed in this province of geology. Prof. Sedgwick has further proposed to apply the term PaUeozoic ; and Mr Murchison that of Protozoic, to the rocks which constitute the Cambrian and Silurian systems.
  "How far these appellations are useful, we shall see when wc have had speculations presented to us in which they are familiarly used; for necessity is the best apology, and convenience the best rule, of innovations in scientific language. In the names applied to the members of the Silurian system, Mr Murchison, following those examples of geological nomenclature which have been most clearly understood, and most generally adopted, has borrowed his terms from localities in which standard types of each stratum occur. If the Silurian system be as exclusively diffused as some indications seem to imply, we may find the Ludlow rocks in Scandinavia, and the Caradoc sandstone even in Patagonia. Whether a like identification of the more ancient rocks of the Cambrian series with the lowest formations of other countries be possible, may perhaps be (for the present) more doubtful.
  "I have spoken of Mr Murchison's work as if it had formed part of our Proceedings, as, indeed, almost every part of it has done, although it now appears in a separate form. And I will add, that it is impossible not to look with pleasure upon the form in which the work appears, enriched as it is in the most liberal manner, with every illustration, map, and section, picturesque view, and well-marked fossil, which can aid in bringing vividly before the reader all the instructive and interesting features of the formations there described. The book must be looked upon as an admirable example of the sober and useful splendour which may grace a geological monograph.
"Having been tempted to dwell so long on this subject from my conviction of its importance, I must tlie more rapidly proceed with the remainder of ,my survey. Mr Bowman sent us ' Notes on a small patch of Silurian rocks to the west of Abergele.' In this investigation, which is interesting to us as the first application of Mr Murchison's Silurian system, the author found strata of which some could be, by means of fossils, identified with the Ludlow rocks. Mr Malcomson has, by the remains of fossil fishes, shewn that the calciferous conglomerate of Elgin represents the old red sandstone of Clashbinnie, as the Rev. Q. Gordon had already supposed. Finally, proceeding to higher strata, we have to notice a trait of the fossil history of the coal-strata near Bolton-lc-Moors, contributed by Dr Black. A stem of a tree thirty feet long, and inclined at an angle of 18° in a direction opposite to the strata, was discovered, having upon it a Stembcrgia, about an inch in diameter, extending the whole length of the stem, which had been, while living, a parasite plant, like the mighty existing creepers of the tropical regions.
  "The most curious addition to our fossil characters of strata, are the footsteps discovered on the surface of beds of the new red sandstone. It is well known that several years ago such marks were discovered at Corncockle Muir, in Dumfriesshire. Since that time, similar discoveries have been made at various places, and especially in 1884, in the quarries of Hesseberg near Hilbergshausen; and to the animal which had produced the impressions then discovered, the name of Chirotherium was provisionally applied by Professor Kaup. In the quarries of Storeton Hill, in the peninsula of Worral, between the Mersey and the Dec, marks were discovered strongly resembling the footsteps of the Chirotherium of Kaup: these were described by a committee of the Natural History Society of Liverpool, and drawn by J. Cunningham, Esq. Mr James Yates has also described footsteps of four other animals from the same quarries; and Sir Philip Egerton has given a description of truly gigantic footsteps of the same kind, which he terms the Chirotherium Herculis. 
  "Mr Strickland gave us a notice of some remarkable dikes of calcareous grit which occur in the lias-schist at Ethie in Ross-shire, and which hnd already been remarked by Mr Murchison, in his examination of the coast of Scotland, in 1826. They appear not to have been injected from below, but filled in from above.
  "Mr Williamson's 'View of the Distribution of Organic Remains in part of the Oolitic Series on the coast of Yorkshire,' was the welcome continuation of a labour of the same kind already executed for the lower portions of the series, and promised to be continued for the upper. Among the contributions to the fossil history of the oolites, we must also place Dr Buckland's 'Discovery of the fossil wing of an .unknown Neuropterous insect in the Stonesfield slate.' This stratum, the Stonesfield slate, has, during the past years, occupied the Society in the consideration of its fossils in no small degree ; but the speculations thus suggested belong to Palaeontology rather than descriptive geology. Mr -Vfurcliison's notice of a specimen of the Oar's rock, which stands in the sea oil' the coast of Sussex, nine miles south of Little Hampton, shews it to agree with some of the rocks in the greensand or Portland beds; and its thus belonging to the strata below the chalk falls in with the remark of its occurring between the parallels of disturbance which traverse the Wealden of Sussex on the north, and the Isle of Wight on the south; for these disturbances and other facts agree well with the notion of protruded strata between. The wealden strata themselves have been observed by Mr Malcolmson, at Linksfield, near Elgin. It is remarkable, that these strata had already, very unexpectedly, been found by Messrs Murchison and Sedgwick in the Isle of Skye.
  I have also to notice Dr Buckland's account of the discovery of fossil fishes in the Bagshot Sands at Qoldworth Hill, near Guilford. As these fossils resemble those of the London clay, Mr Lyell's opinion that the Bagshot Sands were deposited during the eocene period is strongly confirmed.
The fresh-water beds of the Isle of Wight, which had already supplied specimens of some of the Pachydermata of the Paris basin, have furnished an additional supply of rich fossils, which have been examined by Mr Owen. He has found them to contain bones of four species of Palseotherium, and two species of Anoplotherium ; also a jaw of the Chreropotamus, a fossil genus established by Cuvier; and another jaw closely resembling that of a Musk Deer, which Mr Owen refers to the genus Dicobune, a genus also established by Cuvier upon the fossils of the Paris basin. Such discoveries falling in with the conclusions obtained by the researches of previous philosophers respecting the tertiary period of the earth's history, and supplying what they left imperfect, cannot fail to give us great confidence in the results of those investigations, and to enhance our admiration of the sagacity which opened to us this path of discovery.
  Dr Mitchell gave an account of his attempts to trace the drift from the chalk, and strata below the chalk, as it exists in the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Bedford, Hertford, and Middlesex. This drift I had occasion to notice in my Address last year, in reference to Mr Clarke's elaborate geological survey of Suffolk; and I then stated that this diluvial deposit is known in the neighbourhood of Cambridge by the name of brown clay. Dr Mitchell has shewn that this deposit is of greater extent than we were before aware. But still to determine with precision its principal masses, total extent, and local modifications, would be a valuable service to the geology of the eastern part of our island.
  As my order requires me to take the igneous after the sedimentary rocks, I must here notice Dr Fleming's "Remarks on the Trap Rocks of Fife," which he distinguishes into three epochs;—those of the eastern extremity of the oolites, which are variously associated with the old red sandstone;—those which run from St Andrews to Stirling, which were produced after the coal-measures;—and those which occur along the shores of the Forth, which occur in the higher coal-measures.
  2. Foreign (South European and Trans-European) Geology.—In the survey of the progress of our labours which I offered to your notice last year, I stated, that, in proceeding beyond the Alps, and I might have added the Pyrenees, we no longer find that multiplied series of strata, so remarkably continuous and similar, when their identity is properly traced, with which we have been familiar in our home circuit. Yet the investigations of Mr Hamilton and Mr Strickland appear to shew, that we may recognise, even in Asia Minor, the great formations, occupying the lowest and highest positions of the series, which arc well marked by fossils, namely the Silurian and Tertiary formations ; and also an intermediate formation corresponding in general with the secondary rocks of the north, but not as yet reduced to any parallelism with them in the order of its members. Besides these sedimentary rocks, m this, as in most other countries, there are found vast collections of igneous rocks of various kinds, which interrupt and modify, and may mask and overwhelm the fossiliferous strata. A paper has been communicated to us by Mr Hamilton, " On a part of Asia Minor," namely, the country extending from the foot of Hassan Dagh to the great salt lake of Toozla, and thence eastwards to Coesarea and Mount Arga;us, and thus occupying a part of the ancient Cappadocia.
  It appears that in this district the igneous rocks occupy a large portion of the surface, and the sedimentary strata which are associated with these are not easily identified with those which occur in countries already examined. The district examined by Mr Hamilton contains a limestone belonging to the vast calcareous lacustrine formation of the central part of Asia Minor, and beneath this, a system of highly-inclined beds of red sandstone, conglomerates and marls, which are perhaps connected with the saliferous deposits of Pontus and Galatiu; but which could not be satisfactorily compared with the beds of the south of Europe, for want of the occurrence of organic remains. In only one instance did Mr Hamilton observe the trace of organic bodies in the sandstone; these were impressions resembling fucoids, and similar to those found in the Alpine limestone near Trieste. Mr Hamilton ascended to the summit of Mount Argseus, which had not previously been reached by any traveller, which rises abruptly from the alluvial plain of Coesarea to the height of 13,000 feet.
We have another contribution to the geology of the countries exterior to the Alps and Pyrenees in Mr Sharpe's memoir on the geology of Portugal. He has examined with great care the neighbourhood of Lisbon, and has traced the superposition of the strata, naming the most conspicuous of them from the places in which they are well exhibited. His series (exclusive of igneous rocks) consists of San Pedro limestone (which rests upon the granite), slate-clay and shale, Espichel limestone, red sandstone, hippurite limestone, a lower tertiary conglomerate, the Almada beds, and the upper tertiary sand. In the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, for 1831, Baron Eschwege had examined a geological section taken across the mouth of the Tagus, and passing from the granite of the Serra of Cintra, to that of the Serra of Arrabida. But his identifications of the Portuguese beds do not agree with those of Mr Sharpe, and have indeed the air of proceeding on the arbitrary assumption of a correspondence between this and other parts of Europe. Thus Baron Eschwege has referred both the San Pedro and the Espichel limestones to the magnesian limestone; the red sandstone-formation he considers as Bunter Sandstein, while Mr Sharpe refers it to the age of our Oolites: the hippurite limestone (now acknowledged to be the equivalent of our chalk and greensand), M. Eschwege makes to be Jura limestone; and the Almada beds he would have to be Plastic Clay and Calcaire Grossier. Mr Sharpe is very properly attempting, by a further study of the organic fossils which he has procured, to confirm or correct the identifications to which he has been led. It is only by thus starting from different points, and tracing strata by their continuity, that we can hope to cover the map of Europe, and finally the world, with geological symbols of a meaning fully understood.
Palaeontology. 
  "The portion of our subject which we term Palasontology might, at first sight, seem to form a part of zoology rather than of geology; since it is concerned about the forms and anatomy of animals, and differs from the usual studies of the zoologist only in seeking its materials in the strata of the earth's crust istead of upon its surface. Yet a moment's thought shews us how essential a part of our science the zoology of extinct animals is; for, in order to learn the history of the revolutions which the earth has undergone, we must seek for general laws of succession in the remains of organic life which it presents, as well as in the position and structure of its brute masses. And since such general laws must necessarily be expressed in terms of zoology, it becomes our business to define those terms, so that they shall be capable of expressing truths which include in their circuit the past as well as the present animal and vegetable population of the world.
  "An example of this process has occupied a large portion of our attention during the past year. It appeared to be a proposition universally true, that the oldest strata of the earth's surface contained cold-blooded animals only; and that creatures of the class mammalia only began to exist on the surface after the chalk strata had been deposited and elevated. And when, to a rule of this tempting generality, a seeming exception was brought under our notice, it became proper to examine, whether the anatomical line, which enables us to separate hot-blooded from cold-blooded animals, had really been rightly drawn; and whether, by rectifying the supposed characteristic distinction, the exception might not be eliminated. The exception, on which this very instructive point was tried, consisted in a few jaw-bones of a fossil animal, which, though occurring in the Stonesfield slate near Oxford, a bed belonging to the oolite formation, had been referred by Cuvier to the genus Didelphys, and thus placed among marsupial mammals. In August last, M. de Blainville stated to the Academy of Sciences of Paris his reasons for doubting the justice of the place thus assigned to the fossil animal. Founding his views principally upon the number and nature of the teeth of the fossil, lie asserted that the animal, if a mammal, must come nearest the phocae; but he rather inclined to believe it a saurian reptile; following, as he conceived, the analogies offered by a' supposed fossil saurian described by Dr Harlan of Philadelphia, and termed by him Basilosaurus. M. Valenciennes, on the other hand, asserted the propriety of the place assigned by Cuvier to the fossil animal, although he made it a new genus; and gave to the species the name Thylacotherium Prevostii. The controversy at Paris had its interest augmented when Dr Buckland, in September, carried thither the specimens in question. From Paris the controversy was transferred hither in November, and principally occupied our attention at our meetings till_the middle of January.
"One advantage resulting from the ample discussion to which the question has thus been subjected, has been, that even those of us who were previously ignorant of the marks by which zoologists recognise such distinctions as were in this case in question, have been put fully in possession of the rules and the leading examples which apply to such cases. And hence it will not, I trust, be deemed presumptuous, if, without pretending to any power of deciding a question of zoology, I venture to state the result of these discussions. It appears, then, that some of the marks by which the under jaws of Mammals are distinguished from those of Saurians are the following: (1) a convex condyle; (2) a broad and generally elevated coronoid process; (3) rising near the condyle; (4) the jaw in one piece; (fi) the teeth multicuspid, and (6) of varied forms, (7) with double fangs; (8) inserted in distinct sockets, but (9) loose and not anchylosed with the jaw. In all these respects the Saurians differ; having, for instance, instead of a simple jaw, one composed of six bones with peculiar forms and relations, and marked by Cuvier with distinct names; having the teeth with an expanded and simple fang, or anchylosed in a groove, and so on, Of course, it will be supposed, by any one acquainted with the usual character of natural groups, that this line of distinction will not be quite sharp and unbroken, but that there will be apparent transgressions of the rule, while yet the unity of the group is indubitable. Thus the Indian Monitor and the Inguana, though Saurians, violate the second character, having an elevated coronoid process; but then it is narrow, and this seeming defect in our second character is further remedied by the third; for in those Saurians there is a depressed space between the condyle and the coronoid process quite different from jhat which a mammal jaw exhibits. Again, the teeth of Crocodiles, Piesiosaurs, and the like, are inserted in distinct sockets; but then they have not double fangs. The Basilosaurus was supposed to be a saurian with double-fanged teeth, but that exception was disposed of afterwards. And as there are thus saurians which trench upon the characters of mammals, there are mammals in which some of the above characters are wanting: thus the condyle is slightly or not at all convex in the Ruminantia; there is no elevated coronoid process in the Edentata; the Dolphin and Porpoise have not multicuspid teeth; the Armadillo has not varied forms of teeth, nor has it double fangs to its teeth, which also the fossil Megatherium has not. Still, upon the whole, the above appears to be the general line of distinction. Even if one or two of the above nine marks were wanting to prove the animal a mammal, still if the great majority of them were present, our judgment could not but be decided by the preponderance of characters. But if all the above characters of mammals are present, and all those of saurians absent, it seems to be a wanton scepticism to doubt that the animal was really warm-blooded.
  "Now it was asserted by Mr Owen, who brought this subject before us, that this is the case; that all the characters which I have enumerated above exist in the Stonesfield jaws. If we satisfy ourselves that this is ihe case, I do not see how we can avoid assenting to his opinion,—that the animal belonged to the class Mammalia.
  "Every such question'of classification must resolve itself into two; that of the value, and that of the existence of the characters. If we assent to Mr Owen in his view of the former, we are then led to consider the latter.
  "M. de Blainville, at least in his first examination, had laboured under the disadvantage of formingjhis judgments from casts and drawings only of the Stonesfield bones. Under these circumstances, he had denied several of the above characters; he had held that the teeth in the Thylacotherium are uniform; and that they arc confluent with the jaw ; and that the jaw is compound. These statements Mr Owen, resting upon a careful examination of the specimens, contradicts. The assertion of the compound nature of the jaw is occasioned by a groove near the lower margin of the jaw, which, however, is not so situated as to represent the saurian sutures, but is completely explained by supposing it to be a vascular canal, such as exist in the Wombat, Didelphys, Opossum, and similar animals.
  "Another specimen, at that time the property of Mr Broderip, but now very properly placed in the British Museum, exhibits a jaw similar indeed to the Thylacothere, but belonging to a different genus; and to this species Mr Owen has given the name Pkascolotherium Bucklandi. But these generic names imply that the animals are pouched animals; and in addition to the reasons which led Cuvier to this opinion, Mr Owen has noticed in the fossils an inflection of the lower edge of the jaw, which, so far as has been hitherto observed, occurs in Marsupials, and in them alone.
  "As if this question had been destined to be settled at this time, the only remaining doubt with regard to the possible existence of double fangs in the teeth of a saurian was removed by the arrival in London of Pr Harlan with his ' Basilosaurus.' That gentleman, with great liberality and candour, allowed sections of the fossil to be made in such a manner as to expose the structure of the teeth. And these being examined by Mr Owen, and compared with the general laws of dental structure which he has lately discovered, it appeared that Dr Harlan's fossil was by no means a saurian, but an animal nearly allied to the Dugong, to which Mr Owen proposes to apply the generic name of Zeuglodon, expressing the conjoined form of its teeth.
  "I have not hesitated to lay before you the view of this subject to which I have been led by the discussions in which we have been engaged, notwithstanding the very great authorities which incline to the other side of the balance. Among these I hardly know whether I am to reckon Mr Ogilby, who laid before us a very instructive communication, in which, without deciding the point, he pointed out the difficulties which appear to him to embarrass both views, and especially to contradict the opinion of the marsupial nature of the animal.
  "I have dwelt the longer on this controversy, since it involves considerations of the most comprehensive interest to geologists, and, we may add, of the most vital importance. For—de sumina reipublica agitur,—the battle was concerning the foundations of our philosophical constitution ; concerning the validity of the great Cuvicrian maxim,—that from the fragment of a bone we can reconstruct the skeleton of the animal. This doctrine of final causes in animal structures, as it is the guiding principal of the zoologist's reasonings, is the basis of the geologist's views of the organic history of the world; and, that destroyed, one-half of his edifice crumbles into dust. If we cannot reason from the analogies of the existing, to the events of the past world, we have no foundation for our science; and you, gentlemen, have all along been applying your vigorous talents, your persevering toil, your ardent aspirations, idly and in vain.
  "Besides the important investigations thus referred to, we owe to Mr Owen other palseontological contributions. The genus Cheeropotamvs, esstablished by Cuvier from an imperfect fragment of the bone of a skull, was asserted by him to be a Pachyderm most nearly allied to the Pcccari. A fragment of a lower jaw of the same genus, found by Mr Darwin Fox in the Isle of Wight, confirms this view, but indicates in some points an approach to the carnivorous type. And it was remarked as interesting, that the living genus of the hog tribe which most resembles the Chseropotamus, the Peccari. exists in South America, where the Tapir, the nearest living analogue of the Anoplothere and Palseothere, the associates of the Chcoropotamus, also occur. Another jaw, found by Mr Pratt in the Binstead quarries in 1830, and resembling that of the Musk Deer, Mr Owen refers to a new species of Cuvier's genus Dicobunc, under the name Dichobune cerrrinum. Mr Owen has also given us a description of Lord Cole's specimen of Plesioiarus macrocephalus,' which he compares with Mr Conybeare's Plesiosaurus Dolichodeirus, by establishing an intermediate species, founded upon a specimen existing in the British Museum, and termed by him Plemosaurus Hawkinsii. Besides tracing the analogies which connect these with each other, and comparing them with the two great modifications of the saurian tribe, the crocodiles and the lizards, Mr Owen presented his remarks on the form of the Plesiosaurian vertebra), founding them upon algeneral view of the elements of which all vertebrae are constituted.
  "To the communications thus made to us, we may add Mr Owen's determination of another animal, of which the remains brought from the neighbourhood of Buenos Ayres, are among the many treasures of this kind which we owe to Sir Woodbine Parish. This animal, of gigantic dimensions, appears to have been allied to the Megatherium, but with closer affinities to the Armadillos; and it probably possessed the characteristic armour, of which, in the Megatherium, the existence is perhaps problematical. Mr Owen has termed it Olyptodon, from the furrowed shape of its teeth.
  "In another communication Mr Owen endeavoured to account for the dislocation of the tail of the Ichthyosaurus at a certain point, which is observable in many of the fossil skeletons of that animal. This circumstance, so remarkable from its general occurrence, and which Mr Owen was the first to observe, he is disposed to account for, by supposing a broad tegumentary fin to have been attached to the tail for a portion of its length, the position of which fin must, he conceives, have been vertical.
  "I cannot close my enumeration of tho valuable contributions for which we are indebted to Mr Owen, without remarking how well our anticipations have been verified, when, in awarding him the Wollaston medal last year, we considered the labours which we thus distinguished as only the beginning of an enlarged scries of scientific successes ; and how well also Mr Owen's own declaration, that he should lose no available time or opportunity which could be applied to palecontological research, has been borne out by the services he has rendered that branch of our science.
  "In the remainder of my review of what has been done among us in Palaeontology I must necessarily be very brief. I have already mentioned the discovery of fossil fishes in the Bagshot sand. These fishes have supplied three new genera, which Dr Buckland has distinguished and has named Edaphadon, Pansalodon, and Ameibodon; of which the two first offer combinations of the characters of bony and cartilaginous fishes. Mr Stokes has given us his views of the structure of the animal to which belonged those fossils with which we are so familiar under the name of Orthoceratites. He is of opinion, that these fossils, in their living condition, existed as a shell, enveloped within the body of the animal to which they belonged. He has distinguished three genera of these shells, to which he assigns the names Actinomras, Ormoceras, and Huronia. The Marquis of Northampton also has examined those minute spiral shells which occur in the chalk and chalk flints, and have been termed Spirolinites. And, finally, under this head I must mention Mr Alfred Smee's paper on the state in which animal matter is usually found in fossils.
  "Mr Austen's hypothesis of the origin of the limestone of Devon, though belonging in some measure to Geological DjTiamics, may perhaps be mentioned here, since he explains the position of those beds by reference to the habits of the coral animal. Mr Austen has already shewn himself to us as an excellent observer; and in constructing geological maps, a task requiring no ordinary talents and temper, he has earned our admiration. We shall therefore not be thought, I trust, to depreciate his labours if we receive with less confidence speculations in their nature more doubtful. As we can hardly suppose the calcareous beds of Devon to have had an origin different from those of other countries, we cannot help receiving with some suspicion a doctrine which would subvert almost the whole of our existing knowledge of the relations of fossiliferous beds of limestone.
  Geological Dynamics. "In that part of geology which I have termed Geological Dynamics, and which investigates and applies those causes of change by which we may hope to explain geological phenomena, we may still observe that fundamental antithesis of opinion which has so long existed on the subject:—the division of our geological speculators into Catastrophists and Uniformitarians ;—into those who read in the rocks of the globe the evidence of vast revolutions, of an order different from any which those of man haslsurvived:—and those whojsec in the condition of the earth the result of a scries of changes which are still going on without decay, the same powers which produced the existing valleys and mountains being yet at work about us. Both these opinions have received their contributions during the preceding year: Mr Darwin having laid before us his views of the formation of mountain-chains and volcanos, which he conceives to be the effect of a gradual, small, and occasional elevation of continental masses of the earth's crust; while Mr Murchison gathers from the researches in which he has been engaged, the belief of a former state of paroxysmal turbulence, of much deeper rooted intensity and wider range than any that are to be found in our own period ; and M. de Beaumont in France, has endeavoured to prove that Etna and many other mountains must have been produced by some gigantic and extraordinary convulsion of the earth. Both Mr Darwin and M. de Beaumont refer to the same examples; and while M. de Beaumont conceives that the cones of the Andes must have been formed by an abrupt elevation, caused by subterranean force, Mr Darwin has maintained the opinion, that these lofty summits have been gradually thrust into the place which they occupy by a series of successive injections of molten matter from below, each intruded portion of fluid having time to harden into rock before it was burst and again injected by the next molten mass. For how otherwise, he asks, can we conceive the strata to be thrust into a vertical position by a liquid from below, without the very bowels of the earth gushing out? Without attempting to answer this question, we may observe, that when we suppose, as Mr Darwin supposes, a vast portion of the earth's crust, the whole territory of Chili for example, to rest on a lake of molten stone, there is considerable force in M. de Beaumont's argument: —that when such a fluid is raised to the top of a mountain ten or twenty thousand feet high, the pressure upon the crust which is in contact with the fluid must be more than a thousand atmospheres; and who, he too asks, flatters himself that he knows enough of the interior machinery of volcanos, to be certain.that this vast pressure, acting upon a large surface, may not, by some derangement of its safety-valve, the volcanic vent, produce effects to which we cannot assign any limit?
  In speaking of Mr Darwin's researches, I cannot refrain from expressing for myself, and I am sure I may add for you, our disappointment and regret that the publication of Mr Darwin's journal has not yet taken place. Knowing, as we do, that this journal contains many valuable contributions to science, we cannot help lamenting, that the customs of the Service by which the survey was conducted have not yet allowed this portion of the account of its results to be given to the world.
Although not communicated to us, but to our Alma Mater the Royal Society, I may notice Mr Hopkins's endeavours to throw light upon such subjects as this by the aid of mathematical reasoning. The researches of Mr Hopkins respecting the effects which a force from below would produce upon a portion of the earth's crust have already interested you, and would be of still greater value, if the directions of faults and fissures which result from his theory did not depend very much upon that which, in most cases, we cannot expect to know, the form of the area subjected to such strain. Mr Hopkins has since been employing himself in tracing the consequences of another idea, truly ingenious and philosophical, and which a person in full possession of the resources of mathematics could alone deal with. Some of the effects which the sun and moon produce upon the earth (as the precession and nutation,) include the attraction of those bodies upon the interior portion of the earth, and have hitherto been deduced from the theory by mathematicians, upon the supposition that the earth is solid. But what if the central portion of the earth were fluid? What if it appeared, by calculation, that the fluid internal condition would make the amount of the precession of the equinoxes, or of the nutation of the axis, different from that which the solid spheroid would give? What if it appeared, that the precession and nutation thus calculated for a fluid interior agreed better with observation than the result hitherto obtained by supposing the earth solid? If this were so, wc should have evidence of the earth's interior fluidity, evidence, too, of a perfectly novel and striking nature. But to answer these questions is far from an easy task; the precession of the solid earth is a problem in which Newton erred, and in which the greatest mathematicians of modern times have not found their greatest strength superfluous. Yet how incomparably more difficult in all cases is the mechanics of fluid than of solid bodies! It may, therefore, require more than one trial before any satisfactory solution of the problem can be obtained. Mr Hopkins has attacked it by the aid of certain hypotheses, and the result is, so far, not favourable to the decisiveness of this test of the interior condition of the earth; but, notwithstanding this state of things, I venture to say on your behalf, gentlemen, that an idea so full of promise of that which we so much desire, and which seems to be so utterly out of our reach, the knowledge of the condition of the centre of the earth,—that such an idea is not to be slightly abandoned.
  M. Nccker, of Geneva, offered an addition to the causes of convulsions of the earth, which aro contemplated by our Geological Dynamics, in a paper in which he ascribed the earthquakes which took place in the southern provinces of Spain, in 1829, to the falling in of strata, the subjacent gypseous and saliferous masses being washed out by subterraneous currents. Without denying all influence to such a cause, we may observe, that it docs not appear likely that there would be thus produced, simultaneously, any greater effects than those which are known to have occurred from the falling in of unsupported mines; and these have never approached in their scale to any except the smallest earthquakes.
While geologists are thus looking in all directions for causes which may produce the phenomenon which they study, it is natural that the powerful, but as yet mysterious, influences of electricity should draw their attention. Mr Robert Were Fox has endeavoured to shew, that by voltaic agency, a laminated structure, and deposits of metals in cracks, resembling metallic veins, may be produced in masses of clay. The experiments are of an interesting kind, and it can hardly be doubted that voltaic agency had some influence in such cases as those described by Mr Fox; although Mr Henwood and Mr Sturgeon have failed in attempting to reproduce his results, and although results much resembling these occur in cases where no electrical action is suspected. But we may remark, that the conditions under which such voltaic effects are produced, have not yet been attempted to be defined with any accuracy; and that, till this is done, the reality of such agency can neither be verified nor applied to geological speculations.
  A reflection which naturally offers itself upon this review of our recent career, is this :—that different portions of the science of geology advance with very different rapidity. Descriptive Geology is constantly and actively progressive: facts arc accumulated by observers in every land; and though facts are, in truth, of no value, at least for any purpose of science, except so far as they are reduced to some classification, yet, on the other hand, sound classifications are perpetually, almost necessarily, suggested, when observation is vigilant and persevering. Even if we at first express our facts in terms of a false classification, wc find afterwards the means of translating them into the language of a true one. And the spirit of geological observation is so widely diffused, and so thoroughly roused, that I trust wc need not anticipate any pause or retardation in the career of Descriptive Geology. I confess, indeed, for my own part, I do not look to sec the exertions of the present race of geologists surpassed by any who may succeed them. The great geological thcorizers of the past belong to the Fabulous Period of tho science; but I consider the eminent men by whom I am surrounded as the Heroic Age of geology. They have slain its monsters, and cleared its wildernesses, and founded here and there a great metropolis, the queen of future empires. They have exerted combinations of talents which wc cannot hope to see often again exhibited, especially when the condition of the science which produced them is changed. I consider that it is now the destiny of geology to pass from the heroic to the Historical Period. She can no longer look for supernatural successes, but she is entering upon a career, I trust a long and prosperous one, in which she must carry her vigilance into every province of her territory, and extend her dominion over the earth, till it becomes, far more truly than any before, an universal empire.
Such arc the prospects of Descriptive Geology;—of the geology of facts and classifications. To our knowledge of causes, wc can look with no such certainty of its progress being steady and rapid; or rather, wc arc certain the advance must be slow, and may be often and long interrupted. For it is not an advance, to suggest one or another hypothetical cause or change, without assigning the laws and amount of the change: it is hardly an advance even to calculate the results of our hypothesis on assumed conditions. To obtain by induction, from adequate facts, the laws of change of the organic and inorganic creation,—this alone can lead us to those discoveries which must form the epochs of Geological Dynamics. And wo have yet to learn, whether man's past duration upon the earth, wbethereven that which is still destined to him, issuchas to allow him to philosophize with success in such matters;—whether, not individuals only, not a generation alone, but whether the whole species be not too ephemeral, to penetrate, by the unassisted powers of its reason, into the mystery of its origin :—whether man, placed for a few centuries on the earth as in a school-room, have time to strip the wall of its coating, and count its stones, before his parent removes him to some other destination.
And now, gentlemen, I approach the close of my task, and of the office which has been imposed upon me; an office which has been to mc a source of unmingled gratification. The good opinion implied by your selection of me, the good opinion of such a body of men, was an occasion of sincere and earnest self- congratulation,—a self-congratulationhardly damped by my consciousness of an imperfect acquaintance with your science ;—since I trusted that you, though not unaware of my defects, had judged that good will, and a disposition to look at the subject in its largest aspect, might in some measure compensate for them. And if I needed other grounds of satisfaction in the employment which I am thus bringing to its close, I might find them in the reflections I have just been led to make in the progress and prospects of the science with which you are concerned. For it has ever been one of my most cherished occupations, and will, I trust, long be so, to trace the principles and laws by which the progress of human knowledge is regulated from age to age in each of its provinces. To have had brought familiarly under my notice, in a living form, the daily advance of a science so large and varied as yours, has been, as it could not but be, a permanent and most instructive lesson ;—perpetually correcting lurking mistakes, and suggesting new thoughts. And if, while I have looked at your science in this spirit, you have thought me worthy to be called to preside over your body for two years; and if, during that time, you have not repented of your choice, as I have not found my views inapplicable to the subjects which have come before you; I may, I would believe, find in this some ground for confiding in the trains of thought which have thus led me to such a position; and may hope that, however arduous be the task of framing a philosophy of science suitable to its present condition, and of using such a philosophy as a means of furthering knowledge in general, still, that in this task, to which our age is so manifestly called, I too may be a helper.
  I trust that you will excuse these few words uttered with reference to my own peculiar pursuits, since these include yours also, and are my only claim to your indulgence. And now, gentlemen, that I may trespass upon that indulgence no longer, I once more thank you in all earnestness and sincerity for your good opinion which placed me in this cliair, and for the kindness and support which I have on all occasions received from you; and with my best wishes for your prosperity, and that of your science, I resign my office into abler hands.

