THE formations noticed in the following pages are the lias, the inferior oolite, the lower carboniferous series of Smith, and the Bath or great oolite.
  The lias series on the north-east coast of Yorkshire, occupies a rangeof lofty cliffs, varying from 100 to 600 feet in height, and extending with little interruption from the Peak Hill, near Robin Hood’s Bay, to the village of Saltburn, near Redcar.
  It is separable into three great divisions, 1st. the lower lias, 2nd. the marl- stone, and 3rd. the upper lias or alum shale.
  I. Lower Lias.—On no part of the coast is the whole of this division exhibited, or has its depth been ascertained. At the base of Rockcliff, near Staithes, it has a considerable thickness, and at Peak Hill, a section of about 300 feet is exposed. It is probable, however, that its vertical dimensions are much greater, as blue clay is brought up by ships’ anchors at a considerable distance from the shore; and as Trochus Anglicus with some other fossils, is found only among the shingle, generally much water-worn, and apparently washed up from submarine strata.
  At present, nothing is known of the fossils contained in those inferior beds. In the exposed portion, the marl, in the lower strata, is compact, arenaceous, and generally of a dull blue colour, whilst in the upper it is more shaly. The fossils are thinly scattered, and few in species. On the scar at Robin Hood's Bay, near the lowest known part, occurs Gryphcea incurva, and a little higher Gryphcea Machullochi, both in great abundance; and associated with the latter, is sometimes found Gryphcea depressa.
  A little above this bed is a seam which also contains organic remains, the most common, being Hippopodiumponderosum, Pholadomya ambigua, Pholadomya Murchisoni, and Pinna folium. They are found at Robin Hood’s Bay, and near low water mark, under the heights of RockclifF. At the former locality the Hippopodium preponderates, and at the latter the two species of Pholado- mya. The Pinna, which occurs at both places, is sometimes obtained of a very large size, and one which I measured at RockclifF was two feet in length ; but, as is usually the case with this fossil, it was so crushed that it could not be preserved.
  Towards the lower part and about the middle of this division of the lias, are found Ammonites planicosta, with fragments of Pentacrinus Briareus and P. vulgaris, (P. caput Medusae, Miller), principally broken columns, which are very numerous, particularly at Robin Hood’s Bay. Still higher in the series, and towards the top of the sandy strata, I have procured Ammonites cornucopia, A. Turneri, and A. geometricus, especially opposite the Boulby Alum Works; but I am rather undecided respecting these fossils, as they are rare. Thestrata next in succession are softer, and separated by seams of irony nodules, having below them at Robin Hood’s Bay and Skinningrave, a bed which contains the little Plicalula spinosa. Towards the top of the lower lias rock, Belemnites compressus occurs, though not very plentifully. I found it principally at Boulby, where the highest beds are well exposed,
  2. Marlstone.—The next series of beds belongs to the division called the Marlstone ; and has an average thickness of about 130 feet. The first hundred feet are composed of alternating sandy and shaly seams, and the next or upper thirty of sandy shales, divided by bands of argillaceous, irony nodules, which are sometimes united in solid strata, 6 inches thick.
  Towards the lower part of the division Cardium truncatum is very plentiful, especially near Staithes. An interesting fact is connected with this shell. The specimens which have both valves united, are found distinct from those with the valves separated; in the former the casts of the ligaments are preserved, but in the latter they are wanting.
  In the sandstone seams towards the middle and lower part of the series, are found the following fossils in great numbers and confusion.
  This portion of the stratum is best examined on the shore between Staithes and Saltburn, where large blocks of the sandstone have fallen from the cliffs.
  Above these sandstones is a layer of detached, irony and calcareous nodules, very rich in fossils. Of these, Ammonites Clevelandicus, Cardium multicostatum, Isocardia lineata, and Terebratula tetraedra, appear to be the most abundant.
  Eight or ten feet higher, is a series of beds from twelve to fourteen feet thick, consisting of arenaceous, blue shales, divided by bands of ironstone.
The shales are filled with a profusion of fossils in a fine state of preservation, but difficult to extract, owing to the fragile nature of the shell, which is easily separated from the cast. The following is a list of the species : Pecten aequivalvis, P. sublcevis, Avicula cygnipes, A. inaequivalvis, and Plicatula spinosa; also two species of Belemnites.
  The principal locality for these fossils, is under the signal cliff at Staithes, where the shales are near the beach and better exposed than elsewhere.
  In the uppermost bed of ironstone, dividing the marlstone from the upper alum shale, the Ammonites Hawskerensis is found, at the south point of Runswick Bay, and associated with it, at Skinningrave, is a small fossil, apparently a Trochus.
  3. Upper Lias or Alum Shale.—This division consists of three very distinct deposits, which are extremely persistent.
  Though well distinguished by lithological structure, these deposits are much better characterized by their fossils.
  (a.) Near the junction of this deposit with the marlstone, Belemnites compressus occurs in considerable numbers, in a thin layer, especially at Runswick Bay; and at the top, almost immediately below the hard seam (b), is a
layer of argillaceous nodules, which is first seen about a mile north of the village of Staithes, and again under the cliffs at Lyth. At these places the shale, on the Scar, is completely studded, for forty or fifty yards, with round concretions, each containing either one or two Ammonites annulatus, orthealveolus of a Belemnites compressus, the solid portion projecting from the nodule, and resting in the shale. The number of these fossils forms a remarkable feature.
  (6.) About the upper part of this deposit occurs Belemnites tubularis, which is almost universally depressed at the smaller extremity, indicating apparently, that it was thin and delicate. It forms a regular but thin layer, a few inches above or below which it has not been noticed. I have seen it only on the Scar, a little to the south of Whitby, where Belemnites compressus is also found. The top of this deposit is occupied by numbers of Ammonites elegans, and Inoceramus dubius, the former being almost always depressed and as thin as paper; and both it and the Inoceramus are beautifully coated with iron pyrites.
  Throughout the greater part of these shale beds, the fine hard jet, so valuable for manufacturing ornaments, is found in lenticular seams, from half an inch to three inches thick. It is obtained in quantity only in this deposit, which is called by the workmen the "Jet Seam.”
  Towards the middle and upper parts of the seam, large fragments of bi- tuminized, coniferous wood occur, some of them weighing nearly a hundred pounds.
  (c.) This division is by far the most interesting of the three, in its fossil contents.
  Near the lowest part are immense numbers of spherical nodules, all strongly charged with sulphuretof iron. They vary in size from a small nut to six or eight feet in circumference, and often contain Ammonites exaratus, and A. elegans. These nodules are well exposed between Staithes and Ruuswick.
  A little higher is a bed in which numbers of Nucula ovum occur. This fossil is generally diffused through the upper part of the series, but more particularly in this portion. Associated with it, and sometimes even attached to it, is found Orbicula reflexa. A very small variety of Avicula incequivalvis is met with in the same stratum.
  In all the lower portions of this division, (the one from which alum is procured) the remains of Saurians have been found’; and some of the specimens obtained from it ornament the museums of Scarborough, Whitby, and Mr. Witham, of Lartington.
  As yet, I believe only one species of the Teleosaurus and one of Plesiosaurus have been discovered, but two, and probably more, of Ichthyosaurus. One of them corresponds with /. tenuirostris, and the other must have been an immense species, as I have seen a lower jaw which is seven feet in length, and has many of the teeth preserved, some nearly three inches long.
  The Plesiosaurus varies in size, but from a comparison of detached bones with those of more complete specimens* the animal appears to have averaged from fifteen to twenty feet in length. The large specimen in the Scarborough museum would measure, if complete, at least eighteen feet. Its general characters resemble those of the Plesiosaurus common in the lias of Dorset. The Teleosaurus Chapmanni is sometimes found with the remains of the bony plates or scales attached, as in the splendid Whitby specimen, and some fragments in the Scarborough museum. It is rarely obtained with a perfect snout, the dilated extremity* being generally broken off.
  Above the beds containing these remains, the large and beautiful ATautilus astacoides and Ammonites Heterophyllus occur in argillaceous nodules. When slit, they present beautifully the internal generic distinction, the chambers being generally filled with calcareous spar, and the siphuncle with only lias shale. The surrounding nodules, in some rare instances, are composed of sulphuret of iron. In this portion of the series, large fragments of bituminized, coniferous wood are very common, having occasionally a thin coating of jet. From thirty to sixty feet above these strata, Ammonites Walcotti and A. ovatus occur, both in the shale and argillaceous nodules.
  At the Peak Hill, near the top of the upper alum shale, Trigonia literata and Ammonites crassus are found in a thin layer. The latter is remarkable for the thickness of its whorls, and the frequent decomposition of those which constituted the centre of the shell.
  A little above these strata, Ammonites communis, and A. fibulatus are invariably found in small nodules, especially at the Peak to the south, and at Hawsker, to the north of Robin Hood’s Bay. At both places the upper portion of the stratum is seen to great advantage as it descends to the Scar. At the Peak, imperfect remains of an Astacus occur in the same layer of nodules, but generally so crushed that its character is indeterminable.
  The top of this shale at the Peak Hill, appears to contain Am?nonites striatu- lus, enclosed in indurated calcareous masses ; and I am not aware of its having- been met with at any other locality. It occurs so near the top that doubts are entertained whether it belongs to the alum shale, or to the overlying inferior oolite.
INFERIOR OOLITE.
  The subdivisions of this formation next come under our notice. They are best seen at Blue Wick, which presents the following ascending section :
a. 
  (a.) At the bottom of this bed, we find a number of argillo-calcareous nodules, resembling those in the upper alum shale, and containing Ammonites striatulus, Ammonites, (a new species), Orbicula reflexa, Lingula Beanii, Terebratula bidens, and Avicula echinata? These fossils are chiefly obtained at Blue Wick. No other organic remains occur until within ten feet from the top of this division of the formation, where a layer of small nodules is met with, enclosing Astacus rostratus, and a new and larger species which has also been found in the clay of the cornbrash. A beautiful specimen of an antenna is in the Scarborough Museum. A little higher in the series is a thin but extremely characteristic seam of Vermetus compressus, also obtained in the coralline or Oxford oolite.
  ('jb.) Proceeding upwards, we arrive at the series of irregular layers of soft yellow sandstone, throughout the whole of which small fragments of dicotyledonous ? wood, and a species of Belemnites are rather numerous. Towards the top I have found, though rarely. My a literata, and still higher, two species of Ammonites, one of which resembles A. concavus, which also exists in the upper lias. The other is a new species, which I have named A. inornatus.
  (c.) The next bed, a hard ironstone, contains numerous, small, grey pebbles, also the same Belemnites as in the seam below, and is characterized by a great abundance of Terebratula trilineata.
  (id.) The beds of yellow sandstone, occasionally charged with oxide of iron, enclose, within a few feet from the bottom, two seams about four inches each, of small pebbles, and at the top is found the same Belemnites as in the beds b and c though sparingly scattered ; the shell resembling Avicula echinata is mingled irregularly with the pebbles.
  (e.) From the hard ironstone bed, though only four feet thick, are obtained the greater portion of the fossils characteristic of the inferior oolite on the Yorkshire coast. The following is a list of the principal species, which chiefly occupy the middle and lower parts, whilst the top of the seam is characterized by Turritella cingenda, Melania Heddingtonensis, and Terebratula obsoleta.
  (f.) The highest beds of the inferior oolite consist of seven or eight feet of hard ferruginous sandstone, and are apparently destitute of fossils.
   The Ammonites striatulus, Lingulus Beanii, Orbicula rejlexa, Terebratula bidens, and the Avicula echinata sometimes occur in one mass in the lowest bed (a.). The Lingula and Orbicula are always found together, but the Ammonites are more frequently in masses by themselves. The Avicula and Terebratula bidens are very rare.
  The characteristic fossils of this stratum are given by Professor Phillips in his Geology of Yorkshire, and the list continues correct.
LOWER CARBONIFEROUS SERIES OF SMITH.
  With the exception of the upper sandstone and shale, the divisions of this series are the most irregular of any on the Yorkshire coast. I have, however, taken sections at nearly every point where the series occurs, and I have been
guided in my details by those which appeared the most striking and uniform.
The best defined and least irregular are at the elevated cliffs between Clougliton Wyke and Blue Wick, where the whole of the series is well exposed ; and where the upper and middle beds, containing the greater portion of the fossil vegetables, are alone visible.
The following section is in ascending order :
  The superior strata of inferior oolite composed of about 170 feet of sandstone and shale, contain no remains cf well defined plants; but near the centre of the series is a seam of inferior coal, about a foot in thickness, which is worked at Cloughton, but only for burning in limekilns.
   The plants of this lower series of carboniferous shale, except when found in ironstone, are far from being so beautiful and well preserved as those in the upper shales ; from which they also differ in the greater abundance of Pterophyllum minus, Olopleris acuminata, Sphenopteris hymeno- phyllo'ides, and the deeply lobed variety of Cyclopteris digitata, and are apparently characterised by Pterophyllum pcctino'ides, Equisetum laterale, Zamia lanceolata, and the Tympanophora of Lindley and Hutton.
   The thick beds of sandstone may be readily traced along the shore, but the other portions are very variable. The sandstones are generally micaceous and hard, but split readily, and are extensively used as flags. As building stones they are much inferior to many of the beds above the great oolite.
  
  The lithological characters or fossils of this formation vary very little to the north of the White Nab, near Scarborough, but to the south, a striking change occurs, which will be described in its proper place. We will first examine the sections at Cloughton Wyke, and the While Nab, where the great oolite presents the following general arrangement.

  (a.) No fossils have yet been discovered in the lower and middle portions of this division, but towards the upper, l have found a species of Ostrea, Amphidesma decurtatum, Mya calceiformis, and an undescribed Ammonite; and the top of this bed contains Belemnites compressus, B. Aalensis, Melania Heddingtonensis, Amphidesma decurtatum, Serpulce ; and in a layer between this bed (a) and the hard blue, fine grained oolite (b), are found large tuberculated spines of a Cidaris.
  Of the Belemnites, the species which I consider to be the B. compressus of Sowerby, not Voltz, is occasionally twenty inches in length, and about two in diameter; and the diameter of the other, B. Aalensis, is three inches, but the length is not more than seven. The spines of the Cidaris are sometimes five inches long, and about the diameter of an ordinary goose quill. Though they are not rare, I have found no traces of the Cidaris itself.

(6.) This bed is apparently destitute of organic remains.
(c.) The following fossils have been found in this stratum, chiefly at Cloughton.
  Of the Plesiosaurus, we have remains of only one animal, which was found by my father near Scarborough, in 1825.
  To judge from the size of the humerus and femur, the creature was twelve or fourteen feet long. The bones which have been obtained, consisting of the humerus, femur, vertebrae, and phalanges, differ but little from those of the Plesiosaurus Dolichodeirus of ’Whitby and Dorsetshire. The humerus, however, at its flattened extremity, expands equally on each side like the femur of P. Dolichodeirus. Two detached teeth have been found, which, if they really belonged to this animal, will prove a strong character in distinguishing the species. They are about an inch in length, nearly smooth, and very much resemble those of the crocodile.
  (d.) The nodules of ironstone sometimes contain specimens of Ammonites Blagdeni. In this seam a mass of extraordinary bones was found, at the White Nab, near Scarborough. Two of the bones agree in form with those represented in fig. 4 and 5, of Mr. Mantell’s “ Illustrations of Tilgate Forest,” and supposed by him to be the metatarsal bones of the Iguanadon. The longitudinal circumference of the Scarborough specimens is 1 1-L inches, and the transverse 10^ inches. The same mass contains also three bones, which resemble the humerus of an unknown Saurian, given in PI. 14, fig. 3 and 6, of the same work. Their length is 14 inches ; the circumference about the middle of the shaft, 8-L inches ; and around the condyle, 16 inches. There are two other bones which are supposed to be tibias. They are ten inches long; and their circumference at the superior extremity is 15- inches. The circumference at the vertebral extremity of the fragment of a rib is 5-j- inches, and about the middle of the bone 6 inches.
  The same mass encloses also a singular bone, something resembling in form the humerus of an Ichthyosaurus : the length of the supposed, cubital, articulating extremity is 8- inches, and the diameter 7 ; while the diameter of the cylindric part, at four inches from the above extremity, is 3i inches. The entire length of the bone when perfect is uncertain, but it appears to have
been of gigantic size.
   The only portion of a vertebra is a fragment 4-L inches long by 2-L inches
in diameter.
   It is very possible that these remains may belong to the Megalosaurus ; and if this should prove to be the case, we shall have in the superior beds of the great oolite of Yorkshire, some of the interesting fossils of the Stones-field slate
   (e.) The seam of clay, above the ironstone, contains Amphidesma decurtatum with fragments of Avicula Braamburiensis, and of a Gervilia.
   (/.) The next bed, consists of nodular ironstones, separated by alternating seams of argillaceous oolite, each layer being generally about eight inches thick. In the lower argillaceous seams at Cloughton Wyke, Perna quadrata occurs rather abundantly, and in the upper are the following fossils :
   The most abundant of these are Avicula Braamburiensis, with the species resembling A. echinata,
Plagiostoma interstinctum, Gervillia acuta, and Astarte minima. Of Trigonia clavellata, I have
found a single specimen, at the junction of one of the lower argillaceous seams, with a layer of
ironstone. It agrees with the fossil found in the Cornbrash. The Cidaris vagans is rare, and not
being larger than a shilling, can have no connexion with the long tubercular spines before men-
tioned ; but the smaller spines which I shall have occasion to mention, may belong to it.
   In the hard beds of ironstone, Ammonites Blagdeni sometimes occurs, but more rarely than in the bed d.
   I will now describe the upper part of the Bath oolite, at two other localities on the same range, and not more than three miles from White Nab.
These points are at the northern and southern extremities of Cayton Bay,and at low water, on the south side of Carnelian Bay. At the south point of Cayton Bay we find the following descending section.
a. Soft beds of argillaceous oolite, containing Amphidesma decurtatum, Belemnit.es compressus, Avicula Braamburiensis, and large tuberculated spines of a Cidaris resembling those in the layer 
(a.) 3 feet.
b. Alternations of sandstones and carbonaceous shales 	 	
c. Sandstone, sometimes containing Pecopteris Williamsonis and Otopteris obtusa 1 foot.
d. Tenacious blue shale; the lower part carbonaceous : in this seam all the
beautiful Gristhorpe plants occur	 4 feet.
e. Impure coal 	 3 inches.
f. Alternating sandstones, ironstones, and shales 	 25 feet.
g. Irony nodules 	 1 foot.
h. Hard granular bed, very much ironshot, especially at the fissures	 8 feet.
   From the occurrence of the large tubercular spines of a Cidaris, of Avicula Braamburiensis, and Belemnites compressus in the thin calcareous seam, (a) it appears clear to me that the upper beds of the Bath oolite, which at Cloughton Wyke and White Nab are at least thirteen or fourteen feet thick (p. 231 from the top of a to /), are here diminished to three. If this opinion be correct, all the mass of sandstones at this point, considered by Professor Phillips as belonging to his Upper sandstone and shale, must necessarily be removed from that series, and be considered as merely a local and subordinate division of the portion of the oolites of Bath and Brandsby, to which the name of Great or Bath oolite is more particularly applied; and the beds (g) and (h) will form the lower portions of the series thus removed. I should arrive at this conclusion for several reasons. 1st. The occurrence of the three fossils above alluded to, which are not met with in the cornbrash of the Yorkshire coast, the only other formation to which the calcareous bed (a) can be referred, are found together in the upper beds of the Bath oolite ; 2ndly, the existence of beds of sandstone filled with carbonaceous fragments, evidently belonging to the upper sandstone and shale, resting upon the calcareous deposit, whilst in the immediate neighbourhood, we find the cornbrash, surmounted by the Kelloways Rock ; and lastly from the absence of the blue clay, upon which the cornbrash of the vicinity reposes.
   These inclosed sandstones do not appear to extend more than two miles along the coast; and I suppose they thin out beneath the low water mark in some part of Carnelian Bay, as at its northern extremity, or White Nab, we find the superior oolitic beds in their true position; whilst at its southern point, or Ewe Nab, the ferruginous beds occur as at Gristhorpe. So small a portion of the superincumbent sandstones are here exposed, owing to the low cliffs being partially covered with diluvial clay, and the beach with sand and gravel, that we cannot compare them with the section at the opposite side of the bay. On the south side of this point is a small dislocation, but from the limited space between this ferruginous bed, and the spot where the cornbrash first appears to the south, 1 should say that even here the sandstones are far less extensive than at Gristhorpe. In the middle of Gristhorpe Bay a singular depression of the superior rocks, sinks these measures far beneath the line of low water, but they rise into the cliff at the southern point, where we find most of the plants figured by Prof. Phillips in his Geology of Yorkshire, and by Lindley and Hutton in their Fossil Flora of Great Britain, as from the ff Upper Sandstone and Shale.” How far the series continues under the sea to the southward, I have no means of ascertaining. This interesting deposit bears every appearance of a local accumulation, resulting from some eddy or current produced by the flow of a river into an estuary.
  The hard granular bed (h) is literally one mass of fragments of Millepora straminea:, large papilla of a Cidaris, resembling C.Jlorigemma, an innumerable quantity of small smooth spines of another species, which I before alluded to as probably connected with C. vagans, a small muricated spine belonging to the same genus, and small columnar joints of Pentacrinus vulgaris. All these are deposited in extremely regular and even layers, which are so close to each other as completely to fill the rock; the Millepora being found only at the top. This bed, from the quantity of iron contained in it, is extremely hard, and altogether different from any other part of the series.
  If the view I have taken of the sandstones, &c. be correct, it will leave but a very small number of fossils to the true upper sandstone and shale. The plants found in the seam (a) are nearly all new to geologists : the following is a list of such as have already been figured by M. Brongniart, Professor Phillips, and Messrs. Lindley and Hutton.
   I have also in my collection several new species, especially of Sphenopteris, (two species,) Glossopteris and Cyclopteris.
  With but few exceptions, these plants are all characteristic of the shales in which they are found. The following species also occur in the lower sandstone and shale.
  In the same seam I have found Cypris concentrica, Unio distortus, (Bean) and another undescribed species of Unio. This fact, combined with the absence of marine remains, would seem to indicate that the origin of these sandstones and shales is lacustrine, a fact of which I have little doubt. If this be correct, it would appear that a considerable time must have elapsed between the deposition of the marine fossiliferous divisions forming the top of the Bath oolite and the hard ironshot seam of Crinoidem, upon which the sandstones and shales rest.
  The fossils characteristic of the oolitic seams of the great oolite are few, as they bear a general resemblance to those of the cornbrash and inferior oolite.
  The long tuberculated spines of a Cidaris have not been met with in this neighbourhood in any other rock. Professor Phillips has pointed out Phola- domya acuticostata and Rostellaria composita as characteristic of the stratum, and on the coast, at least, I am not aware of the following fossils having been found in any other.
Large spines of a Cidaris.
  To these may be added the mass of gigantic saurian bones from the layer of ironstone.
  The Bath oolite on the Yorkshire coast is not extensively used as a building-stone, but the lower part of it, and the hard crinoidal bed at Gristhorpe Bay and Ewe Nab, have been very successfully employed in erecting the piers at Scarborough. These beds are remarkably durable, and are consequently well calculated for strong water-works, where no particular smoothness is requisite. The attempt has been made to procure lime from some of the beds, but with so little success as to check further trials, especially in a country where a superior material is abundant.


