In publishing the following additions to the British tertiary fossils, some reason should be assigned for classing under one genus such diversity of forms as is here represented, and which might otherwise have been distributed among four proposed genera, viz., Bullcea, Bulla, Bullina, Bullinula. It was my intention so to have arranged them, but upon examination I found the gradations from the depressed and hidden spire to one that is highly elevated, to be so minute and almost imperceptible, that I knew not where to admit the one character and reject the other. Mr. G. B. Sowerby, in his Genera of Recent and Fossil Shells,' No. 39, has united Bullcea and Bulla, at the same time remarking the changes from one to the other to be so gradual, that a distinct generic line of separation cannot be drawn between them, and thinks the union of the two genera to be fairly warranted. I fully concur in this opinion, and in my present descriptions have only given the genus a little more extension, so as to include shells whose spires are quite visible, and more elevated than those which have generally been restricted within the limits of Lamarck's generic character. 

The discordance among conchologists respecting the boundary line between different genera, is a subject of little importance to the geologist, the permanent establishment of species being all that is required for the purpose of identification ; but upon this point it is certainly to be regretted that there should be any dispute, and until we are well acquainted with a shell in all its varieties and monstrosities, this must and always will be the case. The following are all the Bullae belonging to the crag that I have seen ; the descriptions will always be given from my own specimens, unless when otherwise expressed. 
Only one perfect specimen of this pretty shell has fallen into my hands, therefore I presume it rare ; a few imperfect ones have assisted me in drawing up its character. The quadrate form of the outer lip renders this shell very distinct, and not liable to be confounded with any other species. A slight compression round the upper part of the body-whorl takes a little from the straight line of the outer lip, which is much expanded ; the inner lip is not only folded back, forming a small umbilicus, but leaves an elevated ridge inwards, which produces a flattened depression on that side. Muscular impression large and conspicuous ; stria fine, numerous, and diverging. 

I have included this very expanded shell among the Bulla for the reasons above stated, conceiving the expansion of the aperture alone, to be insufficient for generic distinction. 

Shell obovate, spire depressed, visible, aperture large, lip arcuated, vertex truncated, inner lip projecting: sub-umbilicated, striated, sfrk numerous, ornamented ; muscular impression indistinct. 
Two or three specimens only are in my possession, one of which is sufficiently perfect to exhibit all the characters above described. The elegant chain-like markings that ornament this shell are similar to those of Bulla catena, but in other respects it differs from the description of that species. The inner lip stands prominently forward, causing a depression behind it ; the outer one is sharp and arcuated, which gives an oval contour to the shell. The upper part of the outer lip is truncated, leaving the spire visible, though depressed, with a slight compression around the upper part of the body-whorl. 
The whole marked with strice diverging from the summit. 
Shell subcylindrical, vertex truncated, spire depressed, visible, aperture large, expanding towards the base ; striated, strice diverging, muscular impression large. Length f, largest diameter 7 | of an inch. 
The spire is visible although depressed, the upper part of the whorls convex, producing a deep suture or subcanal round the vertex. The aperture is much expanded, showing the muscular impression imperfectly divided, being deeply seated around the base, and slightly visible along the edge of the outer lip, and again deeply impressed at the upper part. — The striae are visible at the apex, running round the convolutions of the shell, but diverging towards the base, where they are almost at right angles with those above. Under a lens it shows externally a very elegant chain-like appearance, produced by small oval depressions, similar to those of Bulla catenata : it has a slight depression behind the thickened edge of the inner lip, running to the base. 

A recent shell from the coast of Bute, given to me by Mr. Lyell, is perfectly identical with the above ; but in its recent state is beautifully transparent, the chain-like strice being visible on the inside. 

Four or five entire specimens, with a few fragments sufficient to allow of a careful comparison, have enabled me to decide upon the identity of this shell with the well-known recent species. Nothing that I could imagine to be the testaceous gizzard, or even a part of it, has ever come under my observation. I have only one fragment from the red crag, but its tenuity is ill adapted to withstand the bouldering of a littoral deposit, and also its comparative rarity in the coral-line crag may account for its non-appearance in the upper bed. 

A shell figured by Brown, in his Illustrations of British Conchology, called Diaphana Candida, pi. 38, fig. 13, 14, somewhat resembles this in outline, but the spire is visible ; and as there is no accompanying description, little can be said respecting it. The inner lip is slightly folded back, forming behind it a small umbilicus, and the outer one expanding towards the base, forms a compression round the upper part of the whorl, a character not unusual in many species of this genus. The aperture diverges from the upper part, assuming a suboval shape. Externally striated, and the outer lip thickened, behind which is seen the muscular impression. 

This is one of the few eocene shells found in this deposit. I presume it to be identical, according to Deshayes' figure and description, except that he says " basi tenuissime striata," whereas the crag shell (when not eroded) is striated all over. There is a shell figured by Brown, called Volvaria pellucida, which may perhaps be the same, but according to the figure the upper part is too much truncated. 
All my specimens have the outer lip broken, but the shell is very distinct in many points. It is shorter and more gibbous than Bulla cylindracea, with the aperture wider. The distinct lines of growth cut the deep-seated striae at right angles, giving the shell a pretty cancellated appearance ; the rounded volutions of the upper part of the shell produce a funnel-shaped umbilicus in the place of the spire, and the fold of the inner lip forms a distinct umbilicus at the base. — 
Twenty specimens of the shell present not the least variation. 
In Montague's description of this shell it is stated to be smooth, with considerable gloss, as it is also in Fleming's British Animals, p. 293 ; no mention is made of its having stria. Nine out of ten of those from the crag are so much eroded as not to show them, but they are very visible in perfect specimens ; this, however, is the case with the recent shells, it is only in some specimens that the strice can be there seen. The recent shell appears in general to be rather more cylindrical, but it corresponds in all other respects. 
This differs from the young of Bulla cylindracea (for which perhaps it might be mistaken) in having the spire visible although depressed ; it has a slight contraction in the upper part of the body, which gives an apparent expansion to the lower part of the outer lip. The whorls are carried rather above the spire, causing it to be depressed, but distinctly visible ; outer lip nearly straight ; no striae to be seen in any of my specimens, however, that may be from erosion or decomposition. 

It appears intermediate between Bulla cylindracea and Bulla obtusa, differing from the former in having the spire visible, and from the latter in being longer and more slender. I am induced to consider it a distinct species, having twenty specimens presenting the same characters ; there is a possibility of its being the young of cylindracea, with a visible spire, only that shell is never contracted in its whorls. 

This shell, I believe, is peculiar to the newest bed, at least I have never seen it from either the red or coralline crag. — The spire of the fossil does not appear, from the few specimens I have seen, to be quite so elevated as that of the recent shell. 

Unfortunately among thirty specimens of this shell which I have found at the above locality, not more than one possesses the spire, and that not in the most perfect state ; therefore I give the characters with some degree of uncertainty. — The specimen which is least mutilated has a small canal running round the apex, at the juncture of the upper part of the body-whorl, similar to that which gives a character to the genus Oliva. The specimens are much eroded at that part, 
(a circumstance not unusual in the slender covering of the sutures in many of the crag shells), independently of which there appears a small canal remaining where the covering is in parts perfect. 

A shell of the same size from China, in the possession of Mr. G. B. Sowerby, much resembles this in having an elevated obtuse spire, with a canal around it, but it has a fold upon the lower part of the inner lip that I do not observe in the crag species. It differs from Oliva in not having a plicated columella, and in wanting the notch at the base, peculiar to that genus. It more resembles, and may hereafter prove the same as Bulla terebellata, pi. 1, fig. 8, 9, 10, Dubois, Conch. Foss. du Plat. Wolhyni-Podolien ; but a comparison with the shell is necessary for such decision. 

Three or four shells of this kind are figured by Brown in his Illustrations of British Conchology, pi. 38, but as they are without descriptions, it is impossible to say whether they are intended for representations of shells in their natural size or magnified. If they be faithfully represented, they present some intermediate forms, and show the very gradual elevation of the spire, which renders it so difficult to separate the species, and will, I hope, afford additional evidence to justify me 
in retaining all these shells (now figured) in the above Linnean genus. 

With the exception of Bulla lignaria all the figures are enlarged, but the natural dimensions of the specimens are indicated by an annexed cross. 


