OF the rocks which occupy the confines of Shropshire and North Wales, lying between the slate mountains on the West, and the extensive formations of limestone, red sandstone, marl, and gravel, on the East, it may be observed generally, that they are very various in their character, and differ exceedingly in their thickness, their induration, and their colour. They are sometimes earthy and amorphous, and at other times crystalline, in their structure. They have sometimes the appearance of mechanical, sometimes of chemical deposits, and sometimes these appearances are united in the same rock. In their composition, they pass from argillaceous to siliceous, and from siliceous to calcareous; but the prevailing earth appears to be clay, the next in quantity ie silica, and carbonate of lime appears to be by much the least abundant of the three. It may also be remarked, that these strata are of moderate thickness, never perhaps exceeding 6 feet in depth, and varying from that to the state of mere partings between one bed and another. The harder strata are commonly separated by thinner beds of soft clay, and often divide, in consequence of a kind of rude crystallization, into angular or rhbmboidal pieces. All these circumstances produce in them a manifest tendency to disintegration. They are generally conformable in their position, and most commonly dip towards the East; but occasionally they exhibit remarkable contortions. They rise with a gentle inclination, and usually terminate towards the West in abrupt escarpments, while the Eastern slopes of the hills, which they constitute, correspond evenly with the surfaces of the strata underneath. They are intersected also by tortuous valleys, which sometimes expand from the condition of narrow wooded glens into level plains of great fertility. Of the mountainous portions of this tract none perhaps are higher than 1500 feet above the level of the sea. Various kinds of trap-rocks rise through them in great masses, and are distinguished by their abrupt and rounded summits.
Passing from these general observations, we may endeavour to illustrate the nature of the strata under review by the detail of their appearances in particular places. This may be best done by pursuing the section of the different rocks across their basset edges.
  1. To begin from the North and proceed gradually Southwards, the line of section, which first claims attention, is in the vicinity of Vale Crucis. The lofty Oernant Mountain rises above the northern boundary of the valley of the Dee, and contains a large slate quarry, belonging to Sir W. W. Wynne. Here the strata are curved with extraordinary regularity into the form of concentric circles, the cleavages of the rock having also the appearance of radii, in consequence of being perpendicular to the direction of the strata. These circumstances are deserving of notice, not only as exhibiting a fine specimen of curvature, but as showing the primitive character of the rock.
  At the distance of about 2 miles to the N. E. is presented the perpendicular face of the rocks of Edlw-y-seg. These are part of the edge of the great basin of limestone, containing the coal formation of North Wales Their direction is generally from East to West, but in a waving course, and through a tract of many miles in length. A steep talus of debris covers about two thirds of their height; and above this their face rises almost perpendicularly, presenting a remarkable specimen of regular stratification, and a striking contrast to the forms of the slate mountains in their vicinity. The divisions of the strata of limestone are rendered conspicuous at a distance by beds of black bituminous shale, which lie between them. This shale is for the most part perfectly soft and friable; it is, however, frequently indurated by the addition of calcareous matter, and thus passes into foetid limestone. It is also sometimes mixed with a large proportion of sand, and then resembles very much the mud deposited in the estuaries of the Dee and Mersey.
These cliffs contain various shells and corals, usually considered as belonging to the mountain limestone of England. In the case of shells occurring in the limestone beds, the matter of the shells is generally removed, only casts remaining, or newer depositions of calcareous spar in place of the original substance. But in the beds of shale the testaceous matter seems to be preserved with very little alteration in its texture or composition. In a formation of so great antiquity in the geological history of the globe, this circumstance appears not a little curious and interesting. The softness of the shale in which they are imbedded, also contributes to render these specimens of fossil shells remarkably perfect, the muscular impressions and interior structure of the larger terebratulae being exhibited with great distinctness.
The valley situated between the Craigs of Eglw-y-seg and the Oernant Mountain, contains hills of moderate elevation. Their superior fertility and beauty, the lively red colour of the ploughed fields, and the rounded masses of red conglomerate scattered among the debris of the limestone, prepare the geological traveller to expect a rock such as that of which they consist, and which is hard, highly ferruginous, stratified, tending to slaty, and composed of grains and small pebbles of the older rocks united by an argillaceous cement. This rock is therefore a variety of the grauwacke of the continental geologists. Its extent is very limited. Nearer Llangollen and about the steep hill of Dinas Bran, we find only the common appearances of the beds of shale, slate, and slaty sandstone, about to be described as occupying by far the greater part of the region under our review.
  2. The next section which I shall attempt to describe, is represented by a line drawn from Oswestry westward to Llansilin. Such a line crosses, within the space of 5 miles, the basset edges of all the strata from the new red sandstone to the slate.
  After quitting the level ground about Oswestry, which consists of gravel, clay, and sand, and covers beds of coal, we come to the strata which dip under the coal, and belong to the millstone grit formation. These strata form several successive ridges, which rise higher and higher as we advance towards the west. The eastern slope of each ridge appears to correspond with considerable exactness to the plane of the strata beneath it, although these strata are overspread with gravel, clay, and sand. The western slope is steeper, cutting across the outcrop of the strata. On the summit of one of these ridges, at the distance of 2 miles from Oswestry, is the race-course, commanding an extensive view of the rounded slate mountains of Wales on the west, and of the plain of Shropshire to the east. Besides the Wrekin and the other hills, which encompass this plain to the south and east, another series of hills meets the eye, which is more interesting to the geological observer, though of inferior elevation. For, as he stands upon the verge of strata dipping east, he sees the hills alluded to dipping in different directions according to the order of their arrangement, so as to form the basin, which contains the coal field, situated on the confines of Shropshire and North Wales. These hills are, 1st, those of Ness-cliff, whose escarpment is towards the South-east; then Greensill; near it the Cleve, which rises with an even slope terminated by a most distinct escarpment towards the east; and lastly the two ridges of Hawkstone, one to the north of the other. Thus the strata of these hills together with those on which the spectator is situated, are seen to converge so as to form a basin for the deposits of coal; and they consequently suggest to him the supposition, that as the rocks beneath his feet belong to the millstone grit formation, those in the series of hills so connected with them may probably belong to the same class of strata.
The ridge, on the summit of whicli the race-course is situated, has a very precipitous escarpment. Along its base flows a small river, called the CynHeth, and the grounds of Llanvorda, the residence of Mr. Henry Wynne, occupy that part of it which lies to the south of the race-course. This escarpment displays in regular succession the strata of the millstone grit formation. The uppermost are found to consist of hornstone, which varies in its colour and texture, sometimes becoming very fine and passing into perfect flint. It divides by its cleavages into rhomboidal pieces, and has evidently supplied many of the pebbles, both angular and rounded, which abound in the gravel between this ridge and Oswestry. Below these strata is a bed, several feet thick, of white sandstone. It consists of grains almost entirely siliceous, which are for the most part cemented into a firm rock by a siliceous deposition: but in many situations the texture of this sandstone is more loose and friable. In some places it is spotted throughout its substance with black and brown oxide of iron; in others it contains the hollow impressions of entrochi. We then come to a remarkable bed of indurated clay, generally of an ochre yellow colour, though sometimes passing into bluish or brownish black. It is light, and adheres to the tongue.
Below this are successive beds of sandstone, the thickness of which far exceeds that of the upper beds, and sometimes amounts to several yards. Some of them contain contemporaneous veins of silica, which are very conspicuous by their projection on surfaces exposed to the weather. Sometimes the sides of these veins are exposed instead of their cross fracture. In these cases they are striated like slickensides, but certainly not from the effect of friction. The upper beds are still white, and somewhat approaching to chert. Those underneath become ferruginous, and contain a few impressions of entrochi and of curved cylindrical forms apparently of vegetable origin. The lowest bed, which is also the thickest, and far exceeds the others in the height of its precipices and the size of its detached fragments, is of a dark red colour, its grains of sand slightly cohering and glittering in the sun. This rock descends to the river, which flows at the base of the escarpment, and also dips under it from the opposite slope of the valley. Its broken and precipitous faces are sometimes reduced by the action of the weather into the form of irregularly rounded masses, and at other times are streaked by the projecting lines of the harder siliceous veins. Pursuing the course of the river from Llanvorda towards its head, we find beds of limestone rising from beneath the sandstone.
The direct road from Oswestry to Llansilin leaves the spot now described at the distance of about a mile to the north. It crosses similar beds, which are extended over a greater space, because accompanied by no escarpment so high and precipitious as that of Llanvorda. We first come to these beds after passing Offa's Dyke about two miles from Oswestry. They are found~through the space of about two miles further along the sides of the road, and in quarries and weather-worn cliffs. They appear to dip uniformly under one another, with an inclination of about 30° to the horizon. The white cherty beds are succeeded by a dark red sandstone, analogous to that which forms the base of the escarpment at Llanvorda. Pebbles of quartz are disseminated through it; the summit of a considerable hill on the left hand of the road called Mynydd Moel, consists of this sandstone. Its exposed cliffs are worn into irregularly rounded masses, and resemble the usual appearances of the red sandstone of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Shropshire. On advancing westwards we next come to a bed which lies under the red sandstone, and consists of grains and small pebbles of quartz with a few pebbles of slate and joints of encrinites, rather loosely aggregated by a calcareous cement. Limestone of the same gray colour with the cement of this conglomerate immediately succeeds; it abounds in corals, encrinites, and shells; large quarries are worked in it on each side of the road: it contains numerous veins, often an inch or more in thickness, of the red sulphate of barytes. Towards the east it slopes gradually with a dip conformable to that of the calcareous breccia and the sandstones lying over it; whereas on the western side, looking towards the mountainous country of Wales, it terminates in perpendicular precipices; it contains beds of soft crumbling shale, and is evidently to be regarded as a continuation of the interrupted chain of the limestone of Eglw-yseg. Among the corallines of these strata is a madrepore, bunches of which are seen on the upper surfaces of the beds of limestone along this ridge, evidently in the same position in which they originally grew. The limestone, which now penetrates and envelops them, has been deposited without removing them from their places, or even materially altering their form. I have observed the same curious phenomenon in the ridge of mountain limestone which rises over the strata of Brecon Forest in South Wales; and I am informed by an accurate observer (Mr. Underwood), that he has seen it in the same formation at Plasnewydd in Anglesea, and on the opposite side of the Menai.
  On advancing westward, so as to surmount the ridge of limestone, the eye is impressed by the immediate change in the character of the scenery, from that of long ridges of moderate elevation to the appearance of huge mountains divided by valleys of corresponding dimensions. Between these two kinds of scenery the wall of limestone forms a line of demarcation. The strata, which dip under the limestone, and constitute mountains 1500 feet in height, consist of numerous beds of a slaty micaceous sandstone, dividing by natural separations into rhomboids of a micaceous clay-slate, and of a soft shale. These beds are very numerous, and various in their thickness; but in general the rhomboidal kind is conspicuous among the others, in consequence of the even vertical surfaces presented by its broken strata. It seems to be the same rock with the rhomboidal killas of Devonshire and Cornwall, which Dr. Berger has denominated Common Grauwacke.
Besides the stratified rocks now described as lying under the limestone, a mass of porphyritic greenstone presents itself at Glascoed near Llansilin in five or six considerable hills, which are distinguished by their abrupt rounded forms, rising like irregular knobs among the stratified rocks, and covered with gorse and coarse grass. The strata of limestone appear more inclined where they lie upon the greenstone, but do not show marks of disturbance.
3. 1 shall now attempt some account of the rocks which occur in the direction of the road from Welchpool to Ludlow, containing the country intermediate between the limestone ridge already described and that of Wenlock Edge. The whole of this tract is principally occupied by strata of the slaty micaceous sandstone, dividing into rhomboidal pieces and alternating with shale, which has been mentioned as lying beneath the limestone at Llansilin; but sometimes a crystalline siliceous deposition occurs, and at intervals unstratified masses of trap present themselves. These, together with the remains of organic bodies, will claim our chief attention.
  An example of the siliceous deposition is seen to advantage in the park near Powis Castle in the immediate vicinity of Welchpool. It occurs in strata dipping towards the north-west at an angle varying from 5° to 70°, and forms a long ridge with an abrupt escarpment. The strata are not separated by planes, but have a waved and swelling superficies. When broken, they divide into pieces having sharp edges and angles, and triangular or trapezoidal surfaces. In many places the rock becomes very red; in others it is little or not at all coloured with iron; masses and thin beds of clay are found among the strata. From the clayey and ferruginous portions the soil of the park is probably derived; it is fertile, and abounds with fine trees: these circumstances all show the identity of this rock with that so often noticed at Bromsgrove Lickey near Birmingham; in this, however, the imbedded grains of sand are larger than in the Lickey quartz-rock. At both these places the siliceous rock contains impressions of the various shells, corals, &c. which are found in the limestone. In some cases the cavities so impressed have been filled again by a subsequent deposition of calcareous spar, which also forms veins in the rock and entirely penetrates its substance.
Half a mile from Welchpool on the west of that town are large quarries of greenstone worked in the side of an eminence called Standard Hill. The principal cleavages of the rock are nearly vertical in parallel planes 10 or 12 yards asunder. By other cleavages, subordinate to these and perpendicular to their planes, it is divided into columns, which lie in a nearly horizontal position and approach to regular prismatic figures. The colour of the rock is in general a light green, sometimes marked with white specks; it contains small portions of anthracite and carbonate of lime. In a part separated from the rest only by one of the great vertical cleavages, it approaches much nearer to the usual appearance of the trap rocks of Great Britain, being harder, of a dark colour, and containing disseminated grains of iron pyrites.
  A grauwacke slate alternating with beds of shale, which forms the ridge of Rallt at a little distance to the north, and great part of the long mountain on the east, is found also at the base of Standard Hill; between it and the greenstone there occurs a dyke or large vein, consisting of rounded pebbles and angular fragments of the contiguous rocks cemented by limestone; each pebble or fragment is surrounded by a coating of white calcareous spar: this dyke of breccia is nearly vertical, and several yards in thickness.
The Breidden group, not far from Welchpool, consists chiefly of various kinds of trap rocks, some of which contain globules of dark brown calcareous spar, crystallized occasionally in diverging radii, and probably derived from the fusion of small fragments of limestone. Sometimes instead of containing globules of spar, the rock contains small angular fragments of limestone.
Trap, similar to that of Standard Hill, occurs again in a hill on the left of the road from Welchgool to Montgomery, immediately to the east of Offa's Dyke. The trap rises in an abrupt and almost square mass above the verge of the hill; it has the remains of a small fortification on its summit, and is called Nant Cribba Moat, being encompassed by a trench. It contains considerable quarries; it is divided like the Standard Rock near Welchpool, by a vertical structure of separation. Large veins of breccia pass through the rock in directions parallel to its great planes of separation, and resemble that of the Standard Rock, except that here the base is trap, and not limestone.
Another large and conspicuous mass of trap is the site of Montgomery Castle; it consists almost entirely of a base of felspar. The trap of Montgomery, like that of Nant Cribba and Welchpool, includes veins of breccia, and also of calcareous spar with coal.
  A variety of shale or slate-clay is seen in immediate contact with the trap at Montgomery, and occurs at intervals through the whole extent of country from that place to Bishop's Castle. This slate-clay easily crumbles down on exposure to the weather; it has a conchoidal fracture, and divides into flattened nodules like those of clay-ironstone, and it is remarkably like the slateclay usually found in connection with clay-ironstone and coal. It passes into the rhomboidal grauwacke slate occurring in the whole surrounding region.
  Corndon Hill rises, at the distance of some miles to the north-east, to the height of 1700 feet above the sea, and contains the Jtag-stone, which is only a variety of this rhomboidal grauwacke slate, and which abounds in the Forest of Brecon and other parts of South Wales. Corndon also rises exactly like the hills in that district, to a sharp edge, with an escarpment towards the lofty mountainous region.
  At the village of Norbury, about four miles north of Bishop's Castle, and at the southern extremity of the Stiperstones, we find a siliceous in connection with a calcareous deposition. The siliceous portion is a gray quartz with a splintery fracture, and somewhat crystalline, dividing into irregular rhomboids and tetrahedrons. In a quarry on the western side of the village the stratification of this rock is distinctly seen, and a large proportion of its beds is full of cavities derived from the testaceous parts of different animals. The casts are chiefly those of a peiitamerus, of the turbinated madreporite of Parkinson, and of a flat fan-shaped bivalve, seen also in the indurated clay of Llanvorda. A few casts of nautilites, entrochi, and trilobites, also present themselves. Veins of sulphate of barytes pass through the rock, and transparent crystals of the same substance extend into many of the cavities formed by the removal of the shells; the same cavities contain portions of the black oxyd of manganese, sometimes in minute botryoidal concretions, and sometimes diffused over the surface of the quartz in dendritical delineations, and also minute fasciculi of silky crystals of malachite. It ought to be remarked further, that although the rock is full of cavities where it is contiguous to the seams and fissures of its strata, yet the substance of the shells generally remains, and the rock is perfectly solid in the inner parts of its rhomboidal distinct concretions.
  After leaving Norbury, as we proceed northwards for at least seven or eight miles, we again find the slaty sandstone in regular strata: its colour is a deep dull red; it contains shining particles of mica deposited conformably to the planes of stratification. It is not crystalline, but consists of minute grains of sand, imbedded in a compact, hard, and very ferruginous clay; the surfaces of its fragments are irregularly triangular or trapezoidal. If the usually received order of superposition be applicable to this portion of the strata of England, we have here in its proper place the old red sandstone. But, confining ourselves to facts, we do not perceive that this rock differs essentially from the micaceous slaty sandstone, or schistose grauwacke, which has been so often mentioned as occurring through this region, and which geologists have also called Transition Slate.
The Stiperstones Mountain is a long and steep ridge situated to the west of the tract of the red schistose sandstone just described; its direction is N. and S., and along its summit are seen large weather-worn masses of a cherty sandstone and of a siliceous conglomerate. Both of these rocks have the characters of the strata belonging to the millstone grit formation; the masses of cherty sandsone have a distinct stratification, the planes of which are now nearly vertical, proving them, notwithstanding their singular position along the ridge of a lofty hill, to be the displaced fragments of a more ancient and regular formation. At the bottom-of this mountain and near its north-western extremity is situated the Snailbach lead-mine, which is worked in the slate, and is described by Mr. Arthur Aikin in the fourth volume of the Geological Transactions. A few miles further north rises Pontesford Hill, terminating on its north-eastern side by an almost perpendicular precipice, and said to consist of trap rocks.
  On the "higher" road from Bishop's Castle to Ludlow, and near the limestone range of Wenlock Edge, is situated Long Lane Quarry, at a little distance above "the Craven Arms." The rock is a fine sandstone, occurring in strata of considerable thickness, and used in all the surrounding country for building: it occurs also in the form of large thick flag-stones; its colour is a greenish gray; it contains portions passing like veins through its substance, which are of a rusty brown colour, and are full of the cavities formed by small terebratulae and other shells, the matter of which has been removed. These brown veins chiefly accompany the divisions of the strata, and the cleavages perpendicular to them. The shells have been more thickly deposited in their substance than in the rest of the rock; the greenish portion of the rock effervesces abundantly in muriatic acid; it may be called a calciferous sandstone. Small particles of malachite and iron may be observed intermixed with the sand, and probably the colour of the rock may be attributed to the presence of these metals: the various appearances may be explained by supposing the carbonate of lime to have been deposited from a state of solution in the same fluid, which contained the granular and sandy portions mechanically suspended. This fluid must have contained also the shells found in the rock, and would deposit them in the greatest abundance in situations contiguous to the present surfaces of the successive strata. After the consolidation of the calciferous sandstone thus produced, another fluid must have penetrated it by following the course of the divisions of its strata and of its cleavages; this fluid must be conceived to have been a solvent of carbonate of lime, and to have removed, as far as it penetrated, both the substance of the shells and the calcareous portion of the sandstone, at the same time altering the colouring matter. The strata of Long Lane Quarry dip to the S.E. at an angle of about 20° to the horizon; if continuous, they must dip under the limestone of Wenlock Edge. The same rock, sometimes more siliceous and argillaceous and sometimes more calcareous, occupies all the country as far as the vicinity of Ludlow.
The rock to the west of Ludlow, in the picturesque grounds of Down ton Castle, is of the same kind with that on which Ludlow Castle stands, and which is also exhibited in large quarries opposite the Castle. The cliffs which overhang the Tame in this demesne, are in many cases divided in the direction of their natural joints or cleavages into the same rhomboidal forms which have so often been noticed. In other cases the effect of atmospheric decomposition has been to exhibit great oval masses in the midst of the shattered fragments of the rock. Where this rock is quarried, the recent openings are commonly marked by its great conchoidal fracture; and the same principle of aggregation which produces this kind of fracture, produces also the forms of the concentric lamellar concretions elicited under the influence of slow decomposition.
Immediately above Downton Castle, Mochtre Hill rises to the N., its strata dipping towards the river Tame. Along its ridge are quarries of limestone: in one of them, called Weaver's Quarry, the upper strata are thin beds of shale with calciferous sandstone in nodular masses, forming irregular strata between the beds of shale: the limestone lies conformably to the beds above it in strata of very considerable thickness.
The most curious and one of the most frequent fossils of this vicinity is the Pentamerus Knightii, (figured in Sowerby's Mineral Conchology, PI. 28.) a different species of the same extraordinary shell, which has been noticed in the quarries at Norbury. The shell consists of fibres perpendicular to the plane of the substance which they compose. The septum, which divides the shell longitudinally into two parts, has a natural parting down the middle. Its two portions are contiguous below, but divide above so as to inclose a small longitudinal cavity. The connection of the septum with the external curvature of the shell is very remarkable. The fibres of the septum being perpendicular to its plane, meet at right angles the fibres of the curved exterior portion. They do not intermix, but terminate upon a plane, which bisects the right angle formed where the septum meets the exterior curvature both above and below. The shells have a tendency to separate both in the direction of these small planes, and of the broader plane, which divides the septum into its two parts. The fibrous structure, which has now been described, resembles that in the bone of the cuttle-fish, the fossil mytilus, &c.
4. A fourth district, respecting which I shall now notice some particulars, is the country in the vicinity of Church Stretton. The "transition, or newest primitive clay-slate," as it is denominated by Mr. A. Aikin, constitutes the mass of the Long Mountain, which fills up the greater part of the space between the line of section just traced, and the region on which we now enter: it shows itself on the western border of the town of Church Stretton; it is here highly inclined, and much contorted; its beds are thin, passing into a soft shale; but it includes beds of a harder and coarser schist, and in all its general characters corresponds with the appearances of the country about Llansilin and other places already described. In contemplating the hills on the other side of the town and of the Watling Street, which passes by its eastern border, we seem to be amidst the vast ruins of a former world: In Caer Caradoc, the most celebrated of these hills, we may trace two great dykes of stratified clay-stone. They rise in numerous ragged precipices above the summit of the hill, and in their forms, though not in their mineralogical qualities, they resemble the before-mentioned fragments of inverted strata, which crown the Stiperstones.
  At the bottom of Caer Caradoc and at its N. E. extremity we find again the same quartz-rock as that of Bromsgrove Lickey, in nearly vertical strata. From a crystalline state it passes into that of a coarse sandstone, the grains of which are rather loosely aggregated; a vein of trap, about 12 inches thick, passes through the sandstone.
  In ascending Lawley Hill above the village of Comely, we again find the quartz-rock near the base of its southern declivity. An excavation has discovered in it an irregular space filled with quartz-pebbles and sand, which are rather loosely cemented with clay. This inclosed mass is divided into angular concretions, with a siliceous cement bounding each concretion, and entering more or less into its substance. We may suppose that the sand and pebbles were first united by a loose cement of clay, and that, as the clay hardened, the entire mass formed itself into its separate concretions; the clay having prevented the free entrance of fluids, the interior of the concretions is devoid of any subsequent addition. But the fluid which contained the siliceous matter of the adjoining quartz-rock has penetrated between the concretions, and for some depth into them. The surfaces of the concretions sometimes exhibit the striated appearance of the slickensides of Devonshire and Cornwall, which has been commonly attributed to the supposed sliding of one mass of rock over another; but in the case before us, and in that already noticed at Llanvorda, the striae are evidently the result of crystallization.
The quartz-rock both here and at the base of Caer Caradoc, contains small portions of malachite, and indeed this substance characterizes the rock whereever I have found it. Ascending Lawley Hill, at a situation higher than the quartz-rock, we again meet with the trap, containing, as on the opposite declivity of Caer Caradoc, globular concretions of radiated epidote.
Lawley extends from north to south in a narrow ridge, which may be regarded as a continuation of that of Caer Caradoc. The two extremities of the ridge have a slight, though very perceptible convergence towards the west; thus the hill assumes something of a crescent form, which may be observed in like manner in most of the trap hills of this region: on the east it is encompassed by a valley of considerable depth, which is terminated by a sharp ridge, somewhat tortuous in its course, and consisting of a fine white crystal line sandstone in strata nearly vertical, and in masses, often of great size, scattered over the broken edges of the strata and the declivity of the ridge. At some distance further east is another ridge, nearly parallel to the former, and separated by a second valley; it consists of a slaty sandstone resembling some of the varieties of grauwacke already described, and dips eastward at an angle of rather less than 30° to the horizon. Still further eastward, but in a direction towards the south, a third siliceous ridge commences, which is called the End Hill of Hope Bowdler; its northern extremity is an abrupt cliff, from which it extends southwards about a quarter of a mile; it consists of a straight chain of extremely rugged barren eminences of quartz-rock, in nearly vertical strata. At the distance of several miles to the south, and at the other extremity of Hope Bowdler, we find a coarse serpentine, containing grains of sand. Still further southward a considerable quarry is worked in strata resembling those of Ludlow and Down ton. The strata are nearly horizontal; in the lower part of the quarry they are a yard or more in thickness, and when broken, show most distinctly the great conchoidal fracture: and their natural separation, according to their cleavage, is into square or rhomboidal pieces with sharp angles.
The hilly country of slate and trap terminates about a mile to the north of Church Stretton. We here stand upon the verge of an extensive plain varied only by swelling knolls of clay and gravel. But on coming within two miles of Shrewsbury, we cross a ridge of trap, which is intersected by veins of schist resembling that at Church Stretton. This ridge is called Baseton Hill, and ranges through a considerable space from N. E. to S.W.
  I now proceed to give some account of the detached portions of rocks, which are of the same nature with those already described.
  1. The first detached district, which I shall notice, is the vicinity of Bewdley. A remarkable trap-dyke is situated a short distance to the north of that town. The Earl of Mount-Norris, through whose estate it passes, has traced it along a straight line of 4 miles in length and in a direction nearly from N. N. E. to S. S.W. It probably extends still further towards Enville in Staffordshire and the forest of Wyre in Shropshire. At Shatterford it crosses the turnpike road from Kidderminster to Bridgenorth, and is accompanied by a bed of coal and by thin broken beds of the usual sandstone of coal-formations, all in a vertical position. It crosses the Severn nearly 2 miles above Bewdley, and occasions a considerable fall in the water, which the bargemen surmount by steering through a gap in the dyke. On the lower side of the water this dyke presents to it a vertical face 16 feet in depth, the sandstone being washed away. It consists of a compact greenstone, similar to those which usually accompany coal-formations. The beds of coal and sandstone and of clay, having the same valuable properties with the Stourbridge clay, extend towards the S.W. in the direction of the dyke, and probably join the coal-formation at the north-western base of the Abberley Hills. The district so occupied is bounded by strata of red sandstone, which rises in picturesque precipices on each side of the Severn at Bewdley, and extends from Kidderminster to the trap-dyke at Shatterford; by beds of limestone, which appear towards the south-west at Burnthorn and Abberley; and by a dyke of white sandstone, which runs for some miles parallel to the trap-dyke, and terminates the coal-formation towards the north-west.
  2. Not more than 10 miles to the east of Bewdley are situated the Clent Hills, distinguished by the names of the Proper Clent Hill, and Walton Hill. Hagley Park rises upon the north-western declivity of Clent Hill, the ridge of which is separated by a deep valley from Walton Hill. A branch of the latter ridge, named Calcut Hill, extends still further towards the S.E. in the direction of Bromsgrove Lickey. This cluster of hills is distinguished by its steep slopes, which give to it the characters of romantic beauty. The rock consists for the most part of the red sandstone, which occupies the whole surrounding country as far as Stourport, Bewdley, Enville, and Stourbridge. At a quarry behind "Thomson's Seat" in Hagley Park, beds of calcareous breccia occur in the red sandstone. They sometimes consist of grains of quartz, decomposing felspar, and limestone; and sometimes of larger pebbles of the same substances, though principally of encrinal limestone. They are highly ferruginous, their cement consisting of the red oxyd of iron intermixed with clay, and the whole mass being further hardened by the infiltration of carbonate of lime, which is going on even at the present day. The upper part of Clent Hill consists of a trap-rock, commonly so much decomposed as to form a complete covering of soil, but occasionally appearing in harder fragments, which have resisted the action of the elements. This trap might come under the denomination of grauwacke, as its cement appears to be principally argillaceous, and it is full of small grains of quartz, felspar, and other minerals. But it has not a schistose structure, and does not exhibit any distinct marks of stratification. Walton Hill consists of a porphyritic and sometimes amygdaloidal trap, very much decomposed. The solid rock is not any where visible. But the soil, penetrating to the depth of two or three feet from the surface, and abounding in angular fragments of porphyritic trap, which is also scattered over the hill and is seen in some openings, where it appears to have lain always undisturbed, sufficiently proves that the whole mass of the hill has consisted of this rock. Calcut Hill, which is much lower than the others, is covered with beds of clay, sand, and gravel, and its whole surface is cultivated.
  3. The detached portions of the older rocks, which are found in the vicinity of Dudley, may be traced to the distance of about three miles from the Clent Hills. Mr. Keir's account of them, in Shaw's History of Staffordshire, renders it unnecessary to attempt more than a supplementary account of some of the most remarkable appearances, which have been brought to light since he wrote. 
  A line drawn from Wolverhampton to Rowley will coincide with the general direction of the chain of hills, which forms the south-western boundary of the South Staffordshire coal-field. The Birmingham canal pursues a serpentine course from Oldbury through this coal-field, the length of which is parallel to the same line. The chain of hills commences rather more than a mile to the south of Wolverhampton, and terminates a little beyond Rowley. All its principal eminences are from 300 to 400 feet above the level of the Birmingham canal. The town of Dudley is situated about half-way between the two extremities of the chain, which at this point is also divided into two portions of the most opposite mineralogical characters.
The northern portion is calcareous. It consists of four hills separated by transverse valleys; all very long in proportion to their breadth; and corresponding in their general direction to the line which has been indicated. The Beacon Hill near Sedgley differs from those further south in yielding lime, which is not only used for building and for agricultural purposes, but also possesses the quality of setting under water. The three hills further south are called Hurst Hill, the Wren's Nest, and the Castle Hill. The two latter are perforated by great artificial excavations. Mr. Downing of Dudley, who superintends the extensive operations carried on in these hills, has favoured me with a very exact transverse section of the Wren's Nest on a scale of 80 yards to an inch.
Since Mr. Keir published his description of the South Staffordshire Coalfield, including a particular account of his own colliery at Tividale, he sunk there a shaft (named Pit N° 11), 55 yards in depth, after which he came to a solid rock of greenstone similar to that of the adjoining hills. The shaft was continued through it to the depth of 35 yards. The workmen then came to coal 4 yards thick, which they described to be in the state of cinders. This pit is at a considerable distance from the base of the Rowley Hills, and on the further side of the road to Oldbury, between it and the Birmingham canal. The other pits in the same colliery are situated towards the south, between N° 11 and the Rowley Hills, and also towards the west and north, but in none of them was greenstone found. If, therefore, this mass of greenstone communicates with the Rowley Hills, it is probably in a direction towards the S. E. Greenstone has been found in the same manner more than two miles from the Rowley Hills at "Moat Colliery," and at Mr. Finch's colliery near West Bromwich.
Since the publication of Mr. Ken's account, coal has been got further eastward, and the result is of some importance in the geology of this district. Shafts have been sunk in the Square Field Colliery near the Swan at West Bromwich. In the Pits N° 1, the Broach Coal is 60 yards from the surface and about 1 yard thick. 56 yards lower is the Main Coal, which is, as usual, 10 yards thick. The dip of the strata in this and some adjoining collieries is towards the north-west, and amounts to 3 or 4 inches in the yard. The fact thus ascertained respecting the dip of the strata in this situation is subversive of the argument for the imagined extension of the coal eastward under the red sandstone, which has been founded upon a comparison of the dip of the strata at the base of the Dudley Hills with their dip in the Warwickshire coalfield near Atherstone and Nuneaton.
Besides the chain of hills which I have already described, another may be traced of a similar character, though of very inferior elevation. It is not continuous, and in most places it is very much altered by decomposition. The indications of its existence, which I have observed, are as follows. Barrow Hill is situated more than half-way from Dudley to King's Swinford on the right hand of the road. Its interior has been in a great measure worked out, and now presents extensive and picturesque excavations. It consists of greenstone, resembling that of Salisbury Craigs, very fine-grained, and containing small crystals of augite. This is accompanied by basalt, which, from its lustre, resembles the Arran pitchstone, but differs from it in being softer, and in yielding a gray streak, and a black, but not porous enamel. The greenstone also includes irregularly-formed globular masses of variously coloured wacke, and veins of calcareous spar, both rhomboidal and fibrous, with quartz, hornstone, and sulphate of barytes in long six-sided tables.
The hilly cultivated ground extending from Barrow Hill to Brierly Hill seems to be of the same formation. At Brierly Hill the greenstone is distinctly seen by the road side near the chapel. Pursuing the line of these hills across some lower ground, we come to a stratified mass of limestone of the same nature with that of the Dudley Hills. It occurs at a place called "the Hayes" in the hamlet of Lye Waste, and forms a narrow broken ridge of small extent, rising very abruptly from beneath successive beds of slate-clay, coal, clay containing balls of ironstone, and a friable substance abounding in pebbles of quartz-rock of various sizes, which seems to be a decomposed greenstone. This substance forms a gritty soil, distinguished by specks of a dirty white and others of a greenish gray, and it may be traced from the Cradley toll-bar to the Lye Waste*. Near the last-mentioned place it incloses pebbles of quartz-rock like that of Bromsgrove Lickey, for which it is quarried as a gravel-pit. When struck with a hammer, it falls in flakes from the sides of the pit, the pebbles dividing by cleavages, which coincide with the surfaces of the flakes of greenstone. To the south of this tract of decomposed greenstone, about Oldenhall, Poxcote, Prescot, and Wollescote, we find sandstones resembling those of coal-formations, and containing the remains of ferns and of trees petrified by calcareous infiltration. The line, along which the greenstone may be thus traced, is parallel to the general direction of the chain of hills before described, and 2 or 3 miles apart from it. The coal-formation, which lies between, is usually considered as a part of the South Staffordshire coalfield, but is separated from it by the Rowley Hills.
About 2 miles south of Oldbury, and the S. E. termination of the Rowley Hills, we find a ridge of coarse conglomerate, called Barnford Hill. It extends about a quarter of a mile in a direction nearly N. and S. Its western declivity is very abrupt, and faces the hills and the village of Rowley. The strata rise towards this side at a high angle, their inclination to the horizon decreasing as they pass eastward. The ridge terminates towards the south in red sandstone near Brand Hall. Towards the north the same conglomerate is seen in the bed of the brook at Oldbury; and the principal head of this stream, called the Lady Well, is remarkably clear and copious like the springs of limestone countries. The pebbles of the Barnford Hill conglomerate consist chiefly of encrinal limestone. With these are intermixed pebbles of quartz and hornstone. The pebbles are sometimes seen impressing their forms on one another, so as to raise the suspicion that some of them have at a former period become soft, although their hardness is now restored. Some of the limestone pebbles are carious on their surfaces, showing that their substance has been partially dissolved. The cement of the pebbles is sometimes calcareous spar, and sometimes a sandstone containing clay together with carbonate of lime; and this sandstone often presents itself lying in thick masses in the midst of the conglomerate rock.
About 5 miles from Birmingham, near the road to Walsall a petrifying spring has been observed, probably originating in beds of calcareous breccia similar to those of Barnford Hill and Hagley Park.
  It is further deserving of record, that the proprietors of the Park Field Colliery at Wednesbury, a district where the main coal disappears, and the fundamental limestone was presumed also to have a tendency to crop out, have recently come to regular beds of limestone at the depth of more than 100 feet after sinking through the usual coal beds and a coarse grit underneath them. The highest bed of this limestone, which is of a bluish colour, contains much clay and abounds in producti and terebratulae.
  4. The Bromsgrove Lickey presents one of the most interesting examples of the older rocks rising in a detached mass through the red sandstone, and has long attracted the attention of geologists. I offer the following remarks as supplementary to Professor Buckland's paper in the 5th volume of the Geological Transactions. Omitting the small deposits of coal and the recent beds of clay and gravel, the strata composing this range are of three kinds; the red sandstone, the limestone, and the quartz-rock.
The red sandstone incircles the others, and occupies by far the greater part of the country through an extent of 20 or 30 miles on every side. Its stratification is very even, and nearly horizontal. It is seen remarkably well at Tardebig, 3 miles south of the Lickey, both in a quarry and at the enVoi. II.—SECOND SERIES. 2 L
trance into a tunnel of the canal, and also in the road, which leads through the hamlet of Burcot. Its general appearance corresponds with that of the red sandstone already described at Llanvorda, Bewdley, and other places. An account of its appearances at Droitwich more especially, is given by Mr. Leonard Horner in Geol. Trans, vol. ii. p. 95.
  In a quarry near the N.E. extremity of the lower Lickey range, the red sandstone is highly ferruginous, and contains small masses of an impure hematite. It is here worked for making lime, as it includes in great abundance grains and small water-worn pebbles of limestone. It thus passes into a calcareous breccia, and in this state it is found a few miles to the north near Frankley Church. Its grains and pebbles are frequently united by a calcareous cement.
The limestone of Bromsgrove Lickey rises immediately from under the red sandstone. I was not able to discover it at the southern extremity of the range; but I remarked, as an indication of its presence either now or heretofore, an abundant growth in that particular spot of the Clinopodium vulgare. Some beds with a copious intermixture of sand appear on the eastern border of the range, to the south of the Birmingham road: and at Colmore's Farm, situated on the N. E. declivity, a bed of pure limestone is worked about 2 feet in thickness and 8 feet from the surface of the ground. A red stiff marl lies over it, and beneath it is a similar marl variegated with blue.
  At a short distance to the east of this limestone, and at the base of a hill called Leach Heath, a shaft has been sunk to the depth of 125 yards by Mr. Attwood, the proprietor of the estate. The beds near the surface are indicative of a coal formation, consisting of slate-clay, sandstone, coal, and ironstone, a considerable portion of the last being in the state of a red oxyd. Beds of limestone alternating with strata of slate-clay succeed, extending to the depth of above 100 yards from the surface. The limestone appears to be exactly analogous to that of Shropshire, containing shells belonging to the genera Pentamerus, Terebratula, Productus, &c. with the same coralloids and trilobite, which occur also in the Dudley limestone. The beds of slateclay, which alternate with the limestone, are remarkable for containing the impressions not only of shells, but of plants apparently belonging to some description of fucus, which has been very much branched, with its frond flat and without a rib.
The quartz-rock of Bromsgrove Lickey, constituting the lowest portion of its strata, passes from the state of a coarse friable sandstone to that of an aggregation of minute but perfectly regular siliceous crystals. The coarse friable sandstone, reddened with oxyd of iron, and having an intermixture of clay, occurs at the southern extremity of Leach Heath. In the greater part of the range the sandy particles, instead of thus loosely cohering, are imbedded in a pure quartz, the fracture of which is highly splendent and vitreous. This rock is consequently very hard. Its usual colour is a smoke gray. Besides the particles of sand, it contains white specks of decomposing felspar, with scattered grains of malachite and of brown hematite. Its strata are marked by the same curved swelling surfaces, which were noticed in Powis Park near Welchpool. By its numerous cleavages, crossing the direction of its strata, it is divided into irregular trapezoidal masses: but its fragments are occasionally found approaching to the more exact rhomboidal forms of common grauwacke. Its strata are sometimes separated by thin beds of clay, which are either of a light green colour, or more commonly of a deep red. Sometimes these seams of clay are unctuous to the touch, and occasionally they pass into steatite. Some portions of the hills, though of rare occurrence, consist of worn angular fragments of the quartz-rock imbedded in a cement, which is softer and more argillaceous, but which belongs to the same formation and is of the same general nature with the whole mass of the hills. The numerous quarries throughout the range afford good opportunities of seeing its stratification, which varies exceedingly in its direction, being sometimes nearly horizontal, sometimes vertical, and frequently more or less curved. A remarkable example of the curvature of the strata was exhibited a few years since in a quarry near the S. E. extremity of the range beside the road to Tardebig. The strata were here seen covering a globular mass of soft micaceous shale, unctuous to the touch, highly ferruginous, and with its laminae conformable to the stratification of the incumbent quartz-rock. Through a thickness of two or three feet the quartz-rock was ferruginous, very compact, and of the same deep red colour with the shale, thus passing into the state of the grauwacke of the region to the westward. Fig. 4. of PI. XXVII. is designed to show the position of the strata at this spot, and the mass of dark red micaceous shale, on which they were incumbent.
The compact quartz-rock, which has now been described, forms the great mass of the lower Lickey range. Its crystalline structure is often more or less apparent, and shows, that while its particles of sand, &c. were mechanically suspended, the siliceous base, in which they are imbedded, must have been in a state of solution in the same fluid. But the most complete proofs of this fact are presented in that portion of the range which has been already mentioned under the name of Leach Heath. The strata in this part principally consist of an aggregation of siliceous crystals, rather loosely united by a cement of clay; which is sometimes deeply reddened with oxyd of iron. The crystals are never more than a line in length, but as perfectly formed as is commonly the case in large crystals of the same substance. Their form is that of six-sided prisms terminated by six-sided pyramids. The transverse striae on the sides of the prisms are clearly discernible by the aid of the microscope. These strata abound in fossil impressions of great delicacy, exhibiting the forms of the Dudley trilobite, of the porpital madreporite of Parkinson, of the joints of an actinocrinites, and of the same shells, which occur in the associated limestone. Among these the impressions of the pentamerus are especially interesting as showing the cavities derived from the septa, by which that genus is so remarkably distinguished. Fragments, exhibiting these particulars, are strewed over the summit of the hill and over its eastern declivity, and in the same situation there has been found a considerable quantity of the common ore of manganese. Under the beds of limestone, which have been already mentioned as occurring at the eastern base of this hill, and at a depth of more than 100 yards from the surface, Mr. Attwood in sinking his shaft came to beds of the quartz-rock, abounding in the same fossil impressions and alternating with beds of a micaceous slate-clay. Many of the beds of this quartz-rock, like that nearer the summit of the hill, consist of an aggregation of minute siliceous crystals; other beds are fine-grained and slaty, more nearly resembling common sandstones. The micaceous shale, or slate-clay, is for the most part of a deep red colour from the presence of oxyd of iron, and frequently the quartz-rock in its vicinity partakes of the same character, or, according to the miner's phrase, "runs red."
The red micaceous shale, which has now been mentioned as occurring between the beds of quartz-rock, presents the same vegetable impressions, resembling Fuci, which were before noticed as occurring in the slate-clay of the superincumbent limestone.
  5. We now pass to a very interesting range of hills, which in their general characters resemble the Lickey range, but are more extensive, more varied in their component parts, and more illustrative of the connection of these detached masses with the general stratification of England. These hills constitute a diminutive, but very regular mountain chain, extending from N.W. to S.E. beside the course of the Coventry canal and the river Anker. The towns of Atherstone, Nuneaton, and Bedworth, are in their immediate vicinity.
This range, like that of Bromsgrove Lickey, rises through an extensive tract of red sandstone, which is seen advantageously at Baxterley Heath, throughout the parishes of Arley, Fillongley, Corley, Allesley, and Meriden, and in a large quarry at Attleborough. The sandstone attains its greatest elevation at Corley, which according to Mudge and Colby's Trigonometrical Survey, is 521 feet above the level of the sea. It is nearly horizontal in its stratification. A thin bed of striated gypsum has been found in it on sinking wells at Higham and Witherley. Its usual appearance is that of the red sandstone of Lancashire, Cheshire, and the midland counties. But on the sides of the road at Meriden it is distinguished by its great con choidal fracture; and to the north of this spot, in the direction of Pillongley and Arley, its lower strata assume the appearance of a calcareous breccia. In both of these particulars it bears a close resemblance to the red sandstone in the vicinity of Exeter and Teignmouth. The cementing matter of the breccia varies continually even in the same stratum, being sometimes red clay, and sometimes carbonate of lime either amorphous and earthy, or crystallized. The substances thus united into a conglomerate rock are still more diversified, varying in size from grains of sand to pebbles several inches long, and consisting principally of encrinal limestone, greenstone, quartz, and hornstone. The pebbles of hornstone are either red or yellow. A large proportion of the limestone pebbles both here and at Barnford Hill, Frankley, and the Lickey, instead of their usual gray colour agreeing with the uniform appearance of the undisturbed strata of limestone, present the fine yellow colour of Sienna marble. They do not appear to contain magnesia, and evidently owe their peculiar colour to the presence of iron, changing to a brick-red when burnt into lime. Perhaps their colour may have arisen from the infiltration of the red oxyd, which is so abundantly diffused through the base of the rock, and which may have been converted into a yellow carbonate of iron after penetrating the limestone. The strata vary from one to four or five yards in thickness. In the parishes of Fillongley and Arley quarries of this rock have been worked at various places both for building and for making lime.
Regular beds of limestone are worked at Mr. Williams's pits, half a mile north of Bedworth, Mr. Pinkerton's N.E. of Arbury Hale, and Mr. Ludford's at Hockley in the parish of Ansley f. Thus the limestone seems to occur in a line passing from N. W. to S.E. Its dip is in the two former places towards the W. or S. W.; in the last it is in the opposite direction. It appears to rise from under the red sandstone already described, and probably the strata of calcareous breccia repose upon it. Near Bedworth it crops out and dips one foot in three. It is worked by means of a shaft 43 yards deep, passing through beds of a light greenish blue colour, stratified conformably to the limestone underneath, and all abundantly impregnated with calcareous matter, but approaching either to clay-slate or to sandstone according to the proportion which they contain of soft clay or of siliceous particles. Mr. Pinkerton's pits are from 23 to 30 yards deep, the strata dipping 1 foot in 10.
The coal formation of this district borders immediately upon the limestone, which has now been described. It seems to lie in a narrow trough passing southwards to Wyken and Sow near Coventry, and northward by Baxterley and Baddesley Ensor to Polesworth f. The dip of the beds of coal corresponds generally with that of the associated limestone. The upper measures contain a large quantity of carbonized wood, and of iron pyrites, either in cubes, arborescent, or mammillary. The beds of sandstone connected with them contain remarkably fine impressions of some of the plants characteristic of coal formations, together with large rounded masses of trap, and pebbles of slate, limestone, and oolite.
  In a direction parallel to that of the formations now described of red sandstone, limestone, and coal, rises a range of hills of a more ancient character. Their whole length is about eight miles. They commence immediately above the remains of Merevale Abbey near Atherstone, and at this part of their course they are intersected by transverse valleys, which are adorned with wood and pasturage, and at the same time in consequence of their depth distinguish this tract of country by the picturesque characters of alpine scenery. The range diminishes in height as it advances towards the S. E. Beyond Griff Hollow it sinks beneath the level marshy plain, which is watered by the river Anker; and, bursting again through the alluvium at Marston, it terminates about half a mile to the south of the Ashby canal.
The fundamental rock of these hills is grauwacke, instead of which quartzrock constitutes the middle portion of the range, the whole being traversed by numerous beds and dykes of greenstone. It may obviate misapprehension to mention, that this is the same range, which is represented in Conybeare and Phillips's Geology as consisting of " coal-shale" and " millstone grit." The grauwacke is seen at almost every opening into the hills from Merevale Abbey to Hartshill, and nearer their southern extremity from Chilvers Coton to Marston. Its dip is generally westward, varying from 20° to 70°. It commonly divides by its structure of separation into rhomboids, and exactly resembles the various appearances of the same rock as seen on the confines of Wales and Shropshire, and through the schistose districts of Devonshire and Cornwall. Among its varieties the most interesting on account of its mineral contents is that of Hartshill Heys, which constitutes the "country" of the rich ore of manganese noticed in Geological Transactions, vol. i. p. 168. 2nd series, and which is like the killas at the southern promontory of Mount Edgecumbe in Devonshire, micaceous and unctuous, of a deep red colour, and readily crumbling into a rich red loam. Other specimens glitter with mica throughout their substance, and may be considered as analogous to the rock at the southern extremity of the Malvern Hills, which has been erroneously called mica-slate. A barren eminence between Griff Hollow and the Coventry canal contains slate, which may be compared to that quarried in the neighbourhood of St. Germains in Cornwall.
The quartz-rock occupies the middle part of the range from Hartshill to the spot where the road to Nuneaton crosses the Coventry canal. Its strata, as well as those of the associated grauwacke, generally dip westward at an angle varying from 40° to 70°. Their surfaces present the same waved and swelling appearance, which characterizes the rock at Bromsgrove Lickey and Powis Castle. I have not however discovered here any organic impressions.
Here are found veins of sulphate of barytes, exactly resembling that which occurs in the trap-rocks of the Malvern Hills. In all other respects the quartzrock of this range agrees with that of Bromsgrove Lickey. Numerous quarries are opened in it; the rock, in consequence of its hardness and its disposition to break into small angular pieces, being used for making roads in all the surrounding country. As it becomes at certain parts more ferruginous and argillaceous, it passes into the ordinary appearance of the grauwacke as already described.
The last substance to be mentioned as entering into the composition of this range is the greenstone, which throughout its course forms either beds in the grauwacke conformable to its stratification, or dykes in the direction of its cleavage. Of these the most remarkable are in Merevale Park. The house formerly called Mere-cliff, and now the residence of D. S. Dugdale, Esq., stands upon the northern extremity of a great dyke, which traverses the park, and, rising in broken wooded eminences above the remains of the softer grauwacke, gives to this demesne its peculiar beauties. In one quarry within the park, veins of calcareous spar and hematite pervade the trap; in another it is seen including fragments of the grauwacke. Beds of greenstone are seen with the grauwacke, in which they lie, in quarries beside Merevale Church, and in the Atherstone Outwoods; in both of these situations the strata dip westwards, at an angle of about 30° in the former instance, and 45° in the latter. Omitting several intermediate localities and passing southwards, we may notice a large mass of greenstone intersected by the Coventry canal, rising upon the southern extremity of the hills of quartz-rock, and where it is contiguous to the quartz-rock, including fragments of it. Another considerable bed is seen at Chilvers Coton, having both above and below a soft unctuous clay of a lively red colour mottled with light green. Still further south, a large mass of greenstone breaks through the grauwacke at Griff Hollow, disturbing its stratification and sending through it some minor branches. The rock, of which these branches consist, is very hard and compact, breaking with difficulty into remarkably sharp fragments, and devoid of any crystalline structure. Its colour is greenish gray, and its fracture splintery. Some beds of it are seen, as represented in PI. XXVII. fig. 3. in a perpendicular face of rock under a shed belonging to "the Newdigate Arms." The mass from which these branches appear to proceed, is about 12 yards thick. It is coarsegrained and perfectly crystalline, but exceedingly tough. Veins of crystallized quartz are found in its vertical rents. Besides its base of hornblende and felspar, it contains, in small disseminated portions, iron pyrites, calcareous spar, mica, and a soft olive-green substance, which seems to be serpentine.
Another bed, in which an extensive quarry has long been worked, is at Marston, where the grauwacke formation terminates. This bed is more than 10 yards thick, and dips east 1 foot in 3. It exhibits veins passing through it in planes nearly vertical, and containing carbonate of lime with siliceous crystals from the smallest size to that of 5 inches in length. These crystals are of the usual form, and envelop portions of the calcareous spar.
6. The last detached groups of the rocks, usually denominated Transition, are those of Leicestershire. As the vicinity of Charnwood Forest has been described, I shall confine myself to a district of much smaller extent, separated by an interval of 8 or 9 miles only from the spot which we have just left. This district lies a few miles east from Hinckley, on the right of the high road from that town to Leicester, and in the parishes of Shilton, Croft, Stony Stanton, and Sapcot. All this region consists of a coarse-grained crystalline greenstone, rising in rocky eminences, between which are situated level plains of alluvium, watered by brooks and sometimes inundated by floods. Such a plain extends from below the village of Stony Stanton to Croft. At this place the stream is discharged between two precipices of greenstone of such elevation, that, if they had not been disjoined, the whole plain above them would have been a lake. The villages of Stony Stanton and Sapcot are on one ridge of rock. But by far the most considerable eminence, and that which presents the most evident characters of a trap formation, is Croft Hill, which runs for nearly half a mile in a direction from N.W. to S. E. The rock is here sometimes porphyritic; and its felspar has a red tinge, which on exposed surfaces is so much increased as to produce, when seen from a little distance, the lively red colour of many syenitic rocks. It has a structure of separation by parallel planes nearly vertical; and by other horizontal planes it is divided into great rhomboidal masses, but without a columnar arrangement. It contains in general no veins of any kind. I only found one exception in a quarry at its eastern extremity, where it is intersected by veins consisting of a coarse serpentine, with white talc crystallized in radiated laminae and with a fine pearly lustre, but changing by decomposition into a soft and very unctuous powder. The occurrence of trap rocks in some situations towards the north-east, as at Barrow Hill near Shilton, and at Potter's Marston and Enderby, indicates the probable extension of this formation to Charnwood Forest.

