THE existence of the bones of quadrupeds in several caves in Germany, in the fissures of the Rock of Gibraltar, and in cavities in limestone-rocks in various parts of the shores of the Mediterranean, has long been known to the literary world; but it is only within these few years that similar collections of animal remains have been discovered in the limestone-rocks of Britain. These collections are highly interesting, as they consist chiefly of the bones and teeth of animals belonging to warmer regions, and not known to have been natives of Britain, at the most distant era to which our history reaches. It is not the object of this paper, to notice all the collections of this kind hitherto discovered in England; but to describe some phenomena of this class which have fallen under the observation of the writer. Some port of what he has to state, has already appeared in a more ample form, in the Geological Survey of the Yorkshire Coast, just published ; and more may be found in a paper lately communicated to the Royal Society by Professor BUCKLAND, which is expected to make its appearance in a few weeks: yet several of die following particulars have been ascertained since the descriptions now referred to were drawn up.
   The opening of the cavern at Kirkdale, near Kirkby Moorade, in Yorkshire, which occurred in July 1821, has brought to light the most singular deposit of such animal remains hitherto observed ; for though the caves of Gaylenreuth in Germany, and some in other parts of the Continent, present much larger accumulations of bones and teeth, die relics entombed at Kirkdale surpass them all in point of variety. Here were found the teeth and bones of the elephant, the rhinoceros, the hippopotamus, the hone, the ox, the elk or stag, the hyena, the wolf, the bear, the tiger, the fox, and the rat; and of some other animals, both large and small, not yet ascertained. Some of the larger' teeth have been assigned, in the Geological Survey, to the Palaotherium magnum, as they appeared to correspond exactly with Mr PARKINSON'S description of the teeth of that extinct animal ; but the author has found that they belong to the lower jaw of the Rhinoceros. The most remarkable specimen not yet identified, is that figured in the Geological Survey, Plate xvii., No. 11., from the collection of the Reverend Jos. SMYTH, A. B. of Kirkby Moorside. A correct model of that specimen, executed by Mr BIRD of Whitby, is now presented to the Wernerian Society.
   Along with the bones of quadrupeds, there were discovered a few bones of fowls. The specimen given in the Geological Survey, Plate xvii., Fig. 3., seems to be a wingbone of a goose, or large duck; and Professor BUCKLAND has wing-bones of a raven and a large pigeon, distinctly characterised.
  The cavern, which is minutely described in the Geological Survey, p. 271, &c. is a long and narrow opening in the oolite limestone, on the banks of Hodgbeck, scarcely a hundred yards to the south-east of Kirkdale Church, and about a furlong from the place where the strata, which gently dip toward the south, rink under the deep alluvium of the Vale of Pickering. The opening was discovered by some workmen employed in quarrying the rock, on the ride of the bank, where the broken edges of the strata are covered with alluvium, forming a slope rather steep. The entrance is about 100 feet distant from the beck or rivulet, 36 feet above its level, and 30 feet below the level of the top of the bank above the quarry. It has been traced inward, in a direction nearly horizontal, above 250 feet, including 45 feet laid open by the operation of quarrying. The breadth of this aperture varies from two or three feet to six or seven. In two places, the height is such as to allow persons to stand upright; in some other parts, we may walk stooping; but in most places, it is necessary to walk on our hands and knees; and in some spots, the roof is so low, that there is no passage but by crawling along the ground.
  Some parts of the cave present obvious marks of fracture and dislocation; and it is traversed by cross fissures in various directions. Yet it is not a mere fissure in the rock, as is evident from the want of correspondence between the opposite sides, and from the existence of a number of rounded hollows or depressions, appearing in the sides, the floor, and even the roof; resembling such water-worn hollows as we see in rocks in the beds of rivers, or on the shores of the ocean. The roof is for the most part quite solid, and where cracks appear; they are far too narrow to have admitted the contents of the cavern to have entered by them. It is difficult, however, to make proper observations on the interior surface, for it is almost every where covered with a crust of stalactite; pillars of which, at the opening of the cavern, were found hanging down like icicles from the roof, completely obstructing the passage in several parts, till they were removed. Quantities of the same calcareous matter covered the floor here and there, in the form of stalagmite; and this, in some places, was collected in the rounded cavities of the floor, each forming a small section of a sphere, resembling a cake of bees'wax, having one side flat, and the other rounded.
    Along the bottom of the cave, there was also found, in most places, a soft mud, or marly clay, varying in depth from an inch to four or five inches; and where the stalagmite prevailed, the surface of the mud was glazed over with it In this mud, or clay, the teeth and bones were principally met with; and the greater part of them, particularly of the larger bones, occurred in a broad part of the cave, about forty feet from the original entrance, and just before the present entrance.
   It is of importance to observe, that the original entrance was of very small dimensions, not exceeding two feet square; and being covered with the alluvium of the bank, to the depth of four feet or upwards, without any vestige of opening or disturbance, the cavern has had no communication with the external air since the alluvial beds were deposited. It has, however, small outlets, running under the alluvium, by which the water that drops from the roof makes its escape; but whether they convey the water to the adjoining stream, or to a subterraneous channel connected with it, cannot be ascertained.
  Among the relics entombed in this cavern, no entire skeletons were found; but the bones and teeth of the various animals were scattered About in wild confusion; and most of the bones, particularly those of the larger animals, were broken and mutilated. A great number of the bones had no appearance of being water-worn; but many others were decidedly rounded and smoothed at their projecting parts, bearing obvious marks of having been long agitated by water. A few of the bones were not found in the mud on the floor of the cavern, but in the stalactite on the sides and towards the roof; where they may have been originally lodged on shelves of the rock, and fixed in their places by the progress of the calcareous incrustation formed over them.
  The remains of the elephant and of the hippopotamus have been found only in small quantity. No entire elephant's grinder is known to have occurred; but I have seen several fragments of grinders, some belonging to large elephants, and some to small. Not more than two or three specimens of the teeth of the hippopotamus have come under my observation. The remains Of the rhinoceros were more plentiful. Some of the larger grinders of that animal, taken from the cave, measure eight or nine indies in circumference at the masticating surface. A specimen of the horn of a rhinoceros is said to have been found; but I have not seen it. Of the ruminating animals, the remains of the elk, or stag, are most copious; numbers of the teeth, with some pieces of the jaw-bones, and fragments of the horns, having been discovered; besides shank-bones, leg- bones, and other relics of that animal. Of the carnivorous animals, the remains of the wolf, the bear, and the tiger, may be noticed as of rare occurrence. Those of the fox were more common. The minute bones belonging to animals of the rat kind, have been found in the mud in considerable quantity; these are generally more entire than the bone of the larger animals. Several jaw-bones, with the teeth, have been obtained; but I have seen no entire example, even of these small animals.
   Of all the relics in the cavern, however, those of the hyena are the most abundant, the teeth and bones being found in great quantities. Not a few entire jaw-bones, chiefly of the lower jaw, have been obtained; and these are very distinctly characterised, as I have observed, on comparing them with a recent skull of the hyena, in the possession of Mr ATKINSON of York.
 Among the mud of the cavern, Professor BUCKLAND discovered some rounded pieces, or bolls, of a whitish substance, which he supposes to be the faecal matter of the hyenas. This substance, being analyzed by Dr WOLLASTON, was found to consist of the same ingredients as the dung of dogs that are fed on bones. I have seen some specimens of this substance; but having observed some pieces of bones nearly in the same state, I am not without suspicion that the whole may be portions of bone, decomposed in the cavern, and reduced to their present form by a mixture of water and other ingredients. No sand or gravel, or next to none, has been found in the mud; yet I have procured from it two or three small pebbles.
   Kirkdale Cavern is not the only cavity in the oolite rock of that quarter, in which such organic remains have been discovered. In the year 1786, some workmen, employed at a quarry about a mile north-east of Kirkby Moorside, laid open a chasm in the rock, several yards below the surface- of the ground, containing a large collection of bones. They were supposed to be the bones of men and horses, whose carcases had been thrown into the chasm, after some battle fought In the neighbourhood: but as the chasm was completely closed above, not by mere alluvial matter, but by the rock itself, forming a kind of arch over it, that explanation of the phenomenon cannot be admitted. It is much to be regretted, that no scientific inquirer examined the contents of that cavern at the time of the discovery. Mr W. BEARCROFT, an intelligent gentleman, now living at Aislaby, near Pickering, visited the spot some time after* when the most interesting bones had been destroyed or lost. He saw no bones of horses, but perceived a mutilated under-jaw of a hog< and part of a leg-bone of a sheep. Most of the other bones appeared to him to be human; and he was told that, at the opening of the Cave, there were found nine human skulls, and eighteen scapula. For want of that minute inquiry which such a subject requires, the real nature of that collection of relics must remain in uncertainty ; but I am strongly inclined to consider it as coeval with the Kirkdale collection.
   In the Manor Vale, adjoining to Kirkby Moorside, caverns in the limestone have been observed for many years. Mr BIRD and I, at one of our latest visits to that quarter, thought it of importance to have some remaining branches of such caverns examined. Mr BIRD, accordingly, made a search into one or two of the branches. He found no animal remains; but discovered in the bottom a kind of mud, like that in the Kirkdale cavern, with a slight mixture of sand. In this were found a number of pebbles, or small rounded stones, chiefly siliceous; and several pieces of blackish vegetable matter, in so decayed a state, that they had no distinct shape. The spot has been since more fully explored, under the direction of the proprietor, CHARLES DUHCOMBE, Esq. M. P., in the hope of obtaining animal remains; but without success.
   Another phenomenon, as mysterious as that exhibited at Kirkdale, was also brought to light in the summer of 1821; Some workmen employed at Pallion Quarry, near Sunderland, found there, in the seams between the strata of the magnesian limestone, two teeth, and several fragments of ribs and other bones. One of the teeth appears to have been broken or lost; the other (of which an exact model is presented to the Society) was given me by Mr THOMAS BAKER, the conductor of the quarry. On my way to Edinburgh, last week, I visited the spot, along with Mr BAKER, and the foreman of the; quarry, by whom the teeth and bones Were found. The place, as stated in the Geological Survey, p. 322, is about sixty-five feet below the surface of the ground, from ten to twenty feet, or more, below the surface of the solid rock, and above an hundred yards from the original face of the quarry, which is towards the bank of the river Wear, fronting the north. The strata have a gentle dip to the south, becoming lower as they recede from the river. There is no vestige of any cave, at the spot where the animal remains were found; nor of any perpendicular fissure, by which they could have fallen down from the surface; nor of any open lateral channel, by which they could be washed into the position which they occupied; but they were found imbedded in a kind of mud, which fills up the seams or horizontal interstices between the beds of limestone. The mud, which is somewhat sandy, rarely exceeds two or three inches thick; but it is of very irregular thickness, as it accommodates itself to the surface of the limestone beds; and these, instead of being smooth, are generally marked with numerous hollows or dimples, which the mud fills up. The bones were not found in any one seam, but in a variety of seams, at various depths, some being ten or twelve feet lower than others; nor was there any visible communication between the higher seams and the lower. Being anxious to ascertain whether any more bones could be found, I directed some of the seams to be examined in my presence; and, after a considerable search, I had the satisfaction of obtaining one or two small fragments of bone. I also procured from the workmen some pieces of ribs which they had formerly taken out. These relics are now shewn to the Society. I have also added a specimen of the mud, with a portion of the mud from the Kirkdale cavern.
   Having stated the leading facts relating to these interesting phenomena, it now. remains that some conjectures should be offered for explaining them. This I propose to attempt in a future paper.


